PREFACE

This book has been written as a learning aid for my EFL students (English as a Foreign Language). It is
geared towards upper-intermediate and advanced students, and the first half goes over the most common
verbs, such as come, bring, put, and make, while the second half runs through the most common
prepositions, such as up, down, with, and on. I’ve grouped the phrasal verbs together to make them sink in
quicker. I’ve also included multiple images in every chapter to draw out the various shades of meaning,
and to make the words easier to memorize. Each chapter has at least one vocabulary table, one micro-text,
one short exercise, and several striking images. All answers can be found at the back of the book, and in
many questions more than one answer is possible. At the end of the book, the vocabulary is revised in a
number of exercises for antonyms and synonyms. For those of you that are hungry for extra resources, I
have a YouTube channel with almost 100 video lessons (‘Learn Phrasal Verbs’) that focus on the same
vocabulary. The playlist is here:
YouTube Lessons on Phrasal Verbs

The following abbreviations crop up page after page in this book, so while you are leafing through or
scrolling down, please remember the following:
sb = someone
sth = something
sw = somewhere
I’d like to thank Yury Khristich for doing the layout of the book. I’d also like to thank my wife for
designing the cover. And lastly, I’d like to thank Wagner ‘Otto’ Verndl, one of my students, for patiently
and painstakingly poring over the subtle details of each and every phrasal verb during our classes. These
lessons have undoubtedly made this book a great deal easier to put together.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Preface

2

CONTENTS

The Most Common Phrasal Verbs......................................................................Page 4
Do.....................19

Set....................61

Call....................95

Make.................22

Keep.................65

Hold..................98

Get....................26

Go.....................71

Lay..................101

Take..................35

Turn..................77

Bear................105

Give..................41

Bring.................81

Let...................108

Come................44

See....................85

Work...............111

Put....................52

Play...................88

Be....................114

Run...................56

Draw.................92

Phrasal Verbs and Movement...........................................................................Page 120
Up...................133

Over................210

For...................233

By....................258

Down..............150

Around /

Back................236

Into.................261

In....................160

About..............218

To....................240

After................265

Out..................170

Through..........222

Of....................246

Against...........268

On...................187

With................226

Away...............250

Together.........271

At....................254

As....................275

Off...................200

Antonyms...............................................................................................................Page 279
Synonyms and Clusters......................................................................................Page 283

ANSWERS...............................................................................................................Page 294

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Contents

3

THE MOST COMMON PHRASAL VERBS

To learn anything by heart, it’s necessary to go back over the vocabulary that you learnt at the beginning
of your studies; therefore, let’s kick off with all those phrasal verbs that you’ll hear all the time in any
English-speaking country. If you haven’t come across these words already, you are sure to stumble upon
them soon. The first table includes some very common phrasal verbs along with their opposites, and it’s
well worth remembering that the opposing part could be the verb itself (go/come, put/take), or the
preposition (on/off, out/in, up/down, together/apart), or both of these. Please note that we use the
prepositions out of and into when the phrasal verb has an object, but we just use out and in when there is
no object. Bear in mind that in some informal speech, you may hear natives using the latter version even
when there is an object.
For example
go out / come in (no object)
He went out at 10pm. He came in and shut the door.
go out of somewhere / come into somewhere. (use out of and into + object)
He went out of the shed.
He came into the dining room.

Vocabulary
get on sth / off sth

enter / exit (public transport and bikes)

get in / out (into sth / out of sth)

enter / exit (cars and taxis)

go out / come in (into / out of)

enter / exit (building, room)

turn sth on / off

switch on / off (machine)

put sth on / take sth off

dress and undress (clothes)

put sth in / take sth out (into sth / out of sth)

remove or add item (bag, pocket, box)

put sth together / take sth apart

(dis)assemble (a model, equipment, furniture)

do sth up / undo, zip sth up / unzip, tie sth up /
untie, button sth up / unbutton (similar to) wrap
sth up / unwrap

fasten, cover (completely)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

4

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I have plugged in my computer.

He is doing up his jacket.

He took the pieces out of the box, and carefully
put the model aircraft together.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 295

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition

I got up at half past seven, put
Putting my wallet and keys

my trousers, and buttoned

my shirt.

my jacket pocket, I came into the kitchen and switched

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

5

the kettle. My son was putting
wife was taking bread

a boat with pieces of Lego while my

of the toaster. Since I had overslept, I gobbled up my breakfast,

drank up my tea and dashed off to work. Getting
put some important documents

the car, I realised I had forgotten to
my briefcase, so I rushed back into the house and

picked them up.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 295

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with an appropriate word
in the correct verb form:
1

He

a grenade out of the ammunition box and threw it at the enemy.

2

Having finished work, I went out of the building,

into the car, and started the

engine.
3

I had to

the wardrobe apart in order to transport it to the new house and fit it

through the front door.
4

You ought to

on a coat, or you’ll freeze to death.

5

The platform was crawling with tourists, so it was extremely difficult to

on the

train.
6

The children were

up presents to give to the family, but musing over what

presents they might put down on their own Christmas lists.
7

up your shoelaces, tuck in your shirt, and tie back your hair; you need to look
smart for the interview.

8

off his hat, he apologised to all those who were gathered around him.

• Did you enjoy putting together models when you were growing up?
• What is the first thing you usually turn on in the mornings?
• Do you usually wrap presents up or just put them into a bag?
• What was the last thing you put into your pockets?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

6

Here are some more phrasal verbs that are of the utmost importance should you ever strike up a
conversation with a native speaker.

Vocabulary
pick sth up

take sth from the floor or table or any surface

look after sb

take care of sb

look for sth or sb

search for sth

look forward to sth

be excited about a future event

call sb back

return a call

find out sth

discover information

take off (no object)

when a plane leaves the runway

split up and break up (with sb) (similar to finish
with sb)
split up (opposite of keep together) (no object)

1) end a relationship

fall over, slip over, trip over (no object)

fall to the ground (in various senses)

get on with sb

have a good relationship with sb

give sth up (similar to cut sth out)

stop a bad habit

cut down (on sth)

reduce a bad habit

let sb down

disappoint sb

2) go in different directions

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

7

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Having slipped on a banana skin, he was taken to
hospital.

He tripped over the computer cable.

Having been at each other’s throat for months,
they split up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

8

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 295

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I’m really looking

to going skiing at the end of February. My wife and I have decided

to go without the kids as they are still too young to go skiing. Fortunately, my mum has offered to look
them for the duration of the trip. I have asked a friend whether he wouldn’t mind
dropping us off at the airport, and I am sure he won’t let us
one of us will fall

. My wife is worried that

on the slopes and break a bone, but I reassured her, explaining that

we will only go down the easier slopes. I am cutting

on cigarettes at the moment, and I

hope that this trip will make it easier for me to give

completely; it always seems easier

to stop bad habits whenever you change your routine.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 295

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with an appropriate word
in the correct verb form:
1

Our dog got lost in the woods, and so we started to
massive, so we

for her; the woods were

up, thinking that we would find her quicker if we went in

different directions.
2

Can you

out what time our plane

off on Saturday? I need to

pass the details on to our taxi driver.
3

Nowadays, many people are aware that

down on carbohydrates can immediately

lead to weight loss.
4

It was so icy in the town centre that many people were

5

I have always

over on the pavement.

on well with my auntie’s family; we have a lot in common and they

are rather laid-back, which makes them easy to chat to.
6

Unfortunately, he is not a very punctual person; he will often

you down by not

showing up at the appointed time.
7

I’m sorry, but I can’t speak to you at the moment. Can I

8

I

you back in half an hour?

over a large rock that was lying on the path, and it left me screaming in agony.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

9

• Do you have to look after any other members of your family from time to time?
• Do you have any exciting plans or events that you’re looking forward to?
• Are you trying to give up or cut down on any bad habits?
• Do you sometimes let your friends down and break your promises?
• Who do you get on with best in your family?

Vocabulary
drop sb off (at sw)

take sb (usually by car) to another place

throw sth away

dispose of sth

get rid of sth

remove or throw sth away

cut sth off (similar to rip sth off, tear sth off)
(compare cut sth out of sth)

remove sth by cutting, ripping, tearing

cut sth up (similar to rip sth up, tear sth up)

cut, rip, or tear into many pieces

eat out (no object)

not eat at home, but eat in a restaurant

eat sth up (similar to drink sth up, gobble sth up
and polish sth off)

eat all that’s on the plate

heat sth up (similar to warm sth up)

make something hotter (food, house)

run out of sth, (similar to) use sth up

have nothing left of sth (time, money, petrol)

turn sb (or sth) down

reject sb or sth (an offer)

work sth out, figure sth out

calculate or understand

break down (no object)

vehicle stops working

turn up, show up (compare with roll up) (no
object)

arrive or appear (roll up is arrive unexpectedly or
late)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

10

Visual Phrasal Verbs

He cut the coupon out of the newspaper.

Cut off 10cm of pipe, and put this aside for later.
It will come in handy.

Unable to hold myself together, I got carried
away and ripped up the letter.

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 295

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I get on well with most members of my family, so I wasn’t surprised when my sister, Jenny, asked if I’d
mind looking after her daughter on Friday night; and, not wanting to let her down, I said that I’d be

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

11

delighted to help. At 7:30 in the evening, she turned

with my niece and told me that she

would be back to pick her up at 10:30. I had run

of food, so we decided to send out for

a pizza. Unfortunately, the delivery driver broke

en route, so the pizza arrived late and

rather cold. As the shop hadn’t even bothered to cut the pizza

, I called the manager to

make an official complaint. We tried heating a few slices
so tasty; we ended up throwing most of it
eat

in the oven, but they weren’t
. We have learnt our lesson: next time we will

.

Exercise 6

Answers on p. 295

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with an appropriate word
in the correct verb form:
1

I thought that I had sailed through most of the test, but I couldn’t

out the answer

to the last question.
2

We need to look after the environment by picking rubbish up and

3

I’m looking forward to

it away.

out at that incredible restaurant, splashing out on the most

expensive dish, and wolfing it all down with enthusiasm.
4

He asked her out, but she

him down; she didn’t like what he did for a living.

5

Having played atrociously for the entire match, I felt as though I had

the whole

team down.
6

There were several particularly violent scenes in the film where body parts were
off.

7

My lunch had already cooled down, so I decided to

8

My son called, asking for help, so I agreed to
there was a traffic jam, so I ended up

it up in the microwave.
him up at 16:00. Unfortunately,
him off at the station at 18:00. But

down on the way back meant that I had to call out the AA (vehicle repair service).
9

I’m going to

10

He

up smoking eventually, but firstly I’ll

down.

up late 3 days in a row, so the boss had a go at him. However, I don’t think the

boss will let him go.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

12

• Have you ever turned down a job offer? Why did you turn it down?
• How often do you eat out? Do you prefer eating out or sending out for a delivery?
• Have you ever broken down on a long journey? or run out of petrol? or been cut up?
• Do you often roll up for work or social events late? What usually holds you back?

Breezing through these exercises, you’ve no doubt been thinking that I’ve made this book too easy. So,
let’s move up a gear and look at phrasal verbs with multiple meanings; I’d like you to muse over the
following questions that focus on the same phrasal verbs we have already seen, but this time they have
completely different meanings. Please bear these multiple meanings in mind when you happen upon them
in later chapters.

Vocabulary
work out
work sth out

1) do exercises at the gym
2) figure sth out

warm up
warm sth up

1) do exercises before a serious match
2) heat sth up, make sth or sb warmer

come into sth (usually some money, or a fortune)

inherit money

pick sth up

1) come down with (an infection) 2) learn a new
language 3) ‘pick up speed’ means speed up
4) start again at a point where you had stopped
5) go to sb’s house to take them sw

pick up (where + clause)
pick sb up (similar to) give sb a lift
rip sb off, mug sb off

cheat sb out of money, do sb out of money, diddle
sb out of money

get cut off (no object)

suddenly get disconnected during a call

turn sth down / up

reduce / increase volume

pick sb up on sth, call sb out on sth

correct sb’s mistake

drop off (similar to) nod off, doze off (no object)
drop sb off at sw

1) fall asleep
2) take sb sw

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

13

take off, (similar to) tear off, shoot off, dash off,
set off, head off

leave (quickly)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The teacher picked me up on my grammar. (Or,
he called me out on my grammar mistake)

Clearly, they’ve picked up a nasty infection;
perhaps they’re coming down with flu?

Smiling sweetly, the guy in the coffee shop ripped
me off: he handed over 10 dollars instead of 20.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

14

Exercise 7

Answers on p. 295

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Dashing

to work, I turned

the volume on my headphones to make

them louder, and ran down the road. My colleague had agreed to pick me

at the corner

of the street. It was a freezing cold morning, and when I got into the car, my mate turned
the heater to warm me

. I was incredibly tired, so I dropped

in the passenger seat. This was a good idea as the traffic was tailing back on the
motorway; it took me almost 2 hours to get to work.

Exercise 8

Answers on p. 296

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with an appropriate word
in the correct verb form:
1

If we

off in five minutes, we will definitely get there on time.

2

That music has been belting out all night. I am going to tell them to

3

I think a teacher ought to

it down.

students up on their mistakes; otherwise, they won’t

improve.
4

I can’t

out the answer to question 7, and I’m not sure how I ought to come at the

problem.
5

I am sure that he was trying to

me off; on two different occasions, he has given

me a five-pound note instead of a ten-pound note.
6

You ought to sit by the fire to

up; it is freezing at this time of year and you

haven’t wrapped yourself up for this kind of weather.
7

He

into a great deal of money when his great aunt passed away.

8

We were in the middle of a conversation on Skype when we suddenly got

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

off.

15

• Do you always remember to warm up before you do any sport?
• What is the best way to pick up English?
• Have you ever nodded off during a class?
• When was the last time you were ripped off? What happened?
• Do you know anyone who has come into a large amount of money?
• What time do you set off for work or school?

Vocabulary
give up (no object)

surrender

cut sb up

dangerously drive in front of sb’s car

do sth up

redecorate sth

1) wrap sth up (with sth)
2) wrap up (no object)

1) finish sth (with sth)
2) put on lots of clothes to stay warm

put on sth
put sth on

1) add or increase
2) to organize a performance or event
3) put on clothes (opposite of take off)

go on at sb about sth (similar to)
waffle/ramble/bang/rabbit/harp/drone/ on at sb
about sth

to talk continuously to sb about sth (in an
annoying way)

break down (no object)

1) when a person is emotionally overwhelmed
2) when a marriage or relationship stops working
3) break sth into smaller pieces (often to make
easier to understand)
4) burst into tears
5) force a door or wall to fall down

break down (no object)
break sth down
break down (no object)
break sth down

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

16

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I’d like to wrap up the meeting with an analysis
of the following data.

Having wrapped up all the presents, we put up the
decorations.

To stroll around the woods one winter morning, I
wrapped myself up in my warmest clothes.

Exercise 9

Answers on p. 296

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

When I found out that I had put
started working

another 10 kilograms, I decided it was high time I
and cutting

on sweet food. I signed up for a one-year

subscription at my local sports centre, hoping that I would burn off lots of calories in the swimming pool,
on the badminton court, and in the gym. During my first visit, I managed to pull a muscle while working

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

17

out, no doubt because I hadn’t warmed

before getting on the machines. After my

second visit, which was to the swimming pool, I came home and began throwing up. I put the symptoms
down to a nasty stomach infection that I must have picked

while swimming. And on the

third visit, which was to the badminton court with my best friend, I was informed that I would have to pay
extra for the badminton court. The subscription fees were incredibly expensive, so I was taken aback to
learn that I would have to fork out even more money. In the end, I gave

trying to lose

weight at the sport’s centre and splashed out on a new bike.

Exercise 10

Answers on p. 296

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with an appropriate word
in the correct verb form:
1

He stopped

out at the gym, and since then he has

on about 20

kilos.
2

I’ll be

off as soon as the boss

great lengths not to

up the meeting; I have to go to

off while he’s

on about performance

standards.
3

One of my colleagues gave me a lift to work, but someone
there, and we crashed into his car, so I

4

We decided to

us up on the way

up late again.

up our flat during the autumn period; we want to do our bedroom

out in a new colour.
5

I forked out £20 on it last week, and by today it had already broken; The shop definitely
me off, so I’ll be taking it back tomorrow, and I expect a full refund.

6

He

into a lot of money when his great aunt passed away, so he splashed out on a

Ferrari.
7

The enemy were holed up in the mountains for 3 weeks, refusing to

up.

Eventually, we came up with a way to flush them out.
8

Every time we chat on the phone, she’s either
on about her children, or

9

He

on about money,

on about the latest gossip.

down in tears when his girlfriend said she had been cheating on him.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — The Most Common Phrasal Verbs

18

• Do you know anyone who has a habit of droning on about the same topics?
• Why do some marriages break down so quickly?
• Are you planning to do up your flat? How exactly?
• When you want to wrap up warm, what do you usually put on?

DO Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
do sth up (compare with doll sb up, dress up,
spruce sb up, sex sth up, jazz sth up)

1) zip sth up or tie sth up 2) decorate or make
more beautiful

do sb over (similar to beat sb up)

hit sb many times in a fight

do without sth (similar to live without sth, go
without sth, get by without sth)

manage without having sth

do sb in

1) injure 2) kill 3) tire or wear sb out (exhaust)

do away with sth (similar to get rid of sth)

1) abolish (a law) 2) kill

do sb down, put sb down, run sb down, talk sb
down, lay into sb

criticize sb

be done for

be doomed

be done out in

be decorated in a certain style

do with sth (similar to have a bearing on sth, bear
on sth)

1) have a relation to, be involved with 2) fancy
(could do with...)

do sth over (and over)

do sth repeatedly

do sb out of, diddle sb out of, cheat sb out of
(compare with rip sb off, mug sb off, take sb in)

deceive sb for financial gain

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DO Phrasal Verbs

19

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The flat was looking drab, so we decided to do it
up.

Dolling herself up for the party, she wondered
how her night would pan out.

I got all spruced up for my brother’s wedding; I
even put on a Tuxedo.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 296

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

The fact that we decided to do

our flat had nothing to do

the barbed

comments that some friends had come out with during their last visit. The day after the visit we splashed

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DO Phrasal Verbs

20

out on new flooring and wallpaper, doing the whole ground floor
couldn’t possibly do

in a Victorian style. I

my cosy fireplace, so we decided to keep it but paint over it once

again. The flooring company tried to do us

of 2000 quid, but we had already figured

out that the total cost should only come to £1500; having taken the problem up with senior management,
we were quickly given a complete refund. We only have to iron out a few problems next week, and then
the renovations will be finished. No one will have the nerve to run our house

again.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 296

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

People tend to dress

if they are going to the theatre.

2

Most people in the modern world find it very difficult to go

their phone for a few

days.
3

Having done a lot of sport this morning, I could do

a large bottle of water; I am

thirsty and completely worn out.
4

I think the government ought to do

with capital punishment: it doesn’t do

anybody any good.
5

Her mother is always doing her

. She makes the same scathing remarks over and

over again.
6

His own brother did him

of his inheritance, so now he is done

7

This course will make you do the same phrasal verbs

.

and

again, and I hope they eventually will sink in.
8

We did our whole house out

blue, but this had nothing to do

me. It was my wife’s idea.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DO Phrasal Verbs

21

• When was the last time you did up your flat or home? What style or colour did you do it out in?
• On which occasions do you dress up? When was the last time you spruced or dolled yourself up?
• Can you remember the last time someone did you out of some money? How were you taken in?
• Do you think we should do away with capital punishment?
• Is there anyone among your family or friends who is prone to doing you down?
• How old were you when you learnt to do up your shoes?

MAKE Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
make for sw

run towards

make up sth (a story)

lie or invent

be made up of sth

consist of sth

make do with sth (get by with sth)

get by (manage) using something which is not
ideal

make up for sth

compensate for sth

make it up to sb by doing sth

compensate sb by doing sth

make out that

pretend that

make sb out to be

assert that sb is

make sth out

manage to see or hear sth (so that you understand)

make out (no object)

kiss (in US English)

make of sth (similar to think of sth) (compare with
hear of)

have an opinion of, consider sb/sth to be

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — MAKE Phrasal Verbs

22

make up with sb (opposite of fall out with sb)

become friends with sb again, resolve a
disagreement

make off (with sth) (similar to run away with)

run off with sth

make after sb (run after sb)

chase

make sb into sth (compare with turn into sth)

cause sb to turn into or transform into sth

make sth over (the noun ‘a makeover’ is more
common)

renovate or create a new look for sb

Visual Phrasal Verbs

He bought her some flowers to make up for his
mistake. OR He tried to make it up to her with
some flowers.

Mozart and Beethoven are names that everyone
has heard of.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — MAKE Phrasal Verbs

23

What do you make of the Royal family? Do you
think we should do away with the monarchy?

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 297

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Having introduced himself, the journalist made

that he was a solicitor representing

several members of my family. He wanted to ferret out as many details as possible in regards to my father,
who had passed away in the previous year. I wanted to see exactly what he was jotting down on his
notepad, but I couldn’t make

his handwriting. He asked me what I made

the stories that had been put out in several newspapers regarding my father’s extramarital activities. I replied that a number of malicious family members, bearing a grudge against my
father because he had diddled them

of a small fortune, had made

a

number of stories in order to get their own back. The ‘solicitor’ reeled off many other personal questions
that I felt were inappropriate. In the end, I threw him out for his impertinence, but I did get in touch with
my disgruntled relatives; I made

for my father’s bad deeds by cutting them in on the

inheritance that I had received.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 297

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

The bank robbers had made

with thousands of pounds, but the police car was

bearing down on them.
2

I’m so sorry for throwing away that box containing all your old photos. I had no idea what was
inside. How can I make it up

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — MAKE Phrasal Verbs

you?

24

3

What do you make

the new Prime Minister? Do you think he’ll do away with

some of the disastrous policies of the previous government and start bringing in some more
effective ones?
4

If you don’t have an ashtray, you’ll have to make do

this plate. But please, don’t

stub it out on the plate. Put it out under a cold tap, then get rid of it.
5

Journalists regularly make
often make

stories in order to manipulate public perception; they
that they are impartial judges who pass on indisputable facts. In

reality, they churn out the same rubbish week after week.
6

Brian broke up with his girlfriend on Friday, but by Monday he had already made
with her.

7

I felt as though I would throw up, so I made

8

I made

9

The press have been making him

the toilet.

for my mistake by splashing out on a bunch of flowers.
to be a monster, but in reality he has been doing

good deeds all his life.
10

The course is geared towards all levels and abilities, so classes are made

of

students from a wide range of backgrounds.

• Do you think a lot of the news is made up? Which stories are less credible?
• If you forgot your best friend’s birthday, how would you make up for your mistake?
• Have you ever made out that you were older or younger than you are?
• Would you be able to make do with a tent if your home were unavailable for a few days?
• What do you make of your Prime Minister or President? What policies would you bring in if you
were in his place?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — MAKE Phrasal Verbs

25

GET Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
get sth across (to sb) (similar to put sth across, put
sth forward, put sth forth, set sth forth)

communicate clearly, convey an idea

get round to sth (+ __ing)

find the time to do an important task

get at sb (compare with hit out at sb, lash out at
sb, run at sb, come at sb = attack)
get at (no object)
get at sth

1) criticize sb

get away (no object) (compare with run away)

escape

get away with sth (compare with run away with)

1) escape unpunished
2) escape with sth

2) mean or imply
3) reach sth

get back (compare with take back, hand back, give have sth returned
back)
get back at sb (compare hit back at sb, strike back
at sb, hit out at sb, lash out at sb)

take/get revenge on sb

get into sth (similar to take up sth, be into sth)
get back into sth

1) become involved or interested in a sport or
hobby
2) get involved one more time

get back to sb (similar to call sb back) (compare
with follow up on sth, act on sth, chase sb up)

contact or respond to sb at a later time

get behind with sth (similar to fall behind with sth, When you are behind schedule with sth
be in arrears with sth)
1) get by
2) get by on/with sth (similar to scrape by on sth,
live on sth, make do with sth)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

1) (no object) have just enough money to survive
2) (with object) have just enough of something to
survive

26

Visual Phrasal Verbs

She’s always getting at him with scathing
remarks. It really brings him down.

I can’t understand what you are getting at.
Perhaps we should meet up and discuss this face
to face.

His friends had to hold him back; otherwise, he
would have lashed out at his rival.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 297

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Getting

your ideas in a concise and clear manner is an essential life skill. If people

don’t understand what you’re getting

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

, you’re less likely to get what you want in both

27

your public and private lives. It’s easier to get
your family members by getting

with your friends, your colleagues and
grammar. And it’s easier to get your message

to the audience when you jazz your speech up with a few rhetorical devices. While it is
true that some successful people do get

with a very limited vocabulary, you should

always do your best to polish up your vocabulary and brush up your grammar.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 297

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

When I was a student, I mainly got

on junk food as I couldn’t be bothered to

cook.
2

During those hard times, it was very difficult to get

; we got

with our mortgage repayments, and we had nothing set aside for a rainy day.
3

Even though the criminal was caught, he got

with it in the end; I thought he was

going to be sent down for at least 5 years, but the judge let him off with a suspended sentence.
4

I don’t know when I will get

to doing the washing up; I’d better crack on with

this homework before I knuckle down with the housework.
5

If he keeps getting

you with snide comments, you need to stand up for yourself!

6

If you leave your name and number, I’ll get

7

I took up windsurfing as a child, but then gave it up in adolescence. Recently, I have got back

to you as soon as I’m available.

it.

• Would you be able to get by on half of your current salary?
• Would you like to get back into any sports or hobbies that you enjoyed in childhood?
• When people send you an email, do you get back to them quickly?
• Have you ever got away with any minor (or major) crimes?
• Do you find it easy to get your ideas across in meetings?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

28

Vocabulary
get on with sb
get on with sth (crack on with sth)

1) have a good relationship with sb
2) start doing sth without delay

get off on sth (compare with turn sb on)

take pleasure or excitement from sth (often
sexual)

get over sth
get over sb

1) recover from an illness
2) recover from a break-up

get through (to sb)

1) contact sb
2) make sb understand sth important

get to sw

arrive or reach

get up (compare with stand up, sit up)

get out of bed

get up to sth, be up to sth

1) do
2) do something suspicious or naughty

get rid of sth (similar to ‘throw away’)

dispose of

get out of sth, worm out of sth, wriggle out of sth,
weasel out of sth
get sth out of sth

1) avoid a responsibility in various senses
2) derive sth (benefit) from an activity

get round sb (compare with bring sb round, come
round, wrap sb round your little finger, talk sb
into)
get sb round (similar to call sb out)

1) persuade sb by being nice to them

get round to sth (get round to + ___ing)

find the time to do an important task

get on (without object)

1) get late
2) get old

get through sth (compare pull through, come
through, see sth through, win through)

manage to survive sth that was difficult

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

2) ask sb to come to your house.

29

Visual Phrasal Verbs

It was such a hectic day that she didn’t even get
round to doing her homework until midnight.

Somehow, he needed to butter her up. So, he tried
to get round her by splashing out on some
jewellery.

We tried to thrash the problem out while we were
eating, but we couldn’t get through to her.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 297

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I have always got

with my sister’s family: her husband is getting

bit, but he is still young at heart; her kids are always getting

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

a

to something, but they love

30

mucking about with my own kids; and my sister is always going on about her colleagues, but her stories
are hilarious. I’ve been so tied up with work for the past few months that I only got

to

inviting them over last weekend. Firstly, my brother-in-law tried to wriggle out of it as he was snowed
under at work, but in the end he caved in to our demands and agreed to join us. They got
our house at 19:00, and we immediately sat down to have dinner. Unfortunately, the
meal was a complete disaster as the meat had gone off, so we had to get rid

it. Instead,

we sent out for a Chinese take-away, and this managed to make up for the terrible dinner.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 297

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

I am desperate to have tomorrow off, but I don’t know how I can wriggle

of it.

What kind of excuse should I make up? It’s not so easy to wrap the boss around my little finger.
2

It took me 30 minutes to get

to the relevant department. I won’t be calling them

back in a hurry!
3

She’s incredibly good at getting

her father. He’s such a soft touch! (He is very

easily manipulated)
4

I’ve been trying to make her understand that she should finish with him, but I can’t get
to her.

5

Look at the time! As it’s getting

, we ought to set off; otherwise, we won’t be in

time for our flight.
6

To get

the winter, many animals stock up on food supplies, find a safe place, and

sleep.
7

Their engagement broke down last week, and he still hasn’t got

8

He’s rather sadistic: he seems to get

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

losing her.

on hurting others.

31

• How long does it usually take you to get over the flu?
• When do you think you’ll get round to finishing off all of this book?
• If you wanted to take tomorrow off, how would you get round the boss? Is it easy to get out of
going to work?
• Is there anyone in your family that you don’t get on with?
• What did you use to get up to when you were little? Were you often told off?

Vocabulary
get carried away (get worked up, work yourself
into a state/frenzy)

let an emotion take over. become emotionally
overexcited and unable to control yourself

get round, get out (no object)

when news becomes widely known

get to the bottom of, fathom out

investigate so that you understand sth deeply

get in on sth, cash in on sth, be in on sth, (similar
to profit from sth, and cut sb in on a deal,
capitalize on sth)

become involved or included in a deal (often for
financial gain)

get sth out of sth
get out of sth

1) derive benefit from an activity
2) avoid a duty or responsibility

get sb down (similar to put sb down, bring sb
down)

make someone depressed, unhappy, exhausted,
etc..

1) get into/out of sth
2) get on/off sth

1) enter a car or taxi
2) enter other forms of transport

get down to sth (knuckle down to sth, buckle
down to sth)

direct your effort and energy towards sth

get off, knock off (work)

finish work

get mixed up with sth, fall in with sth (a bad
crowd)

become friends with a bad group

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

32

Visual Phrasal Verbs

He got out of working late by sucking up to his
colleagues.

He got a lot out of his Russian classes at school;
they helped him immensely when he was living
in Moscow.

This is a most perplexing mystery; only a master
detective could possibly get to the bottom of it.

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 298

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

In the last year of university, I got mixed

with a bad crowd. My new friends spent most

of their time bunking off classes and getting drunk. They weren’t interested in getting anything

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

33

of their courses. One night, we all got carried

and ended up

vandalising several buildings on campus. News soon got

that we were the culprits, and

I decided to own up to my own role in these crimes. However, the dean of the university wanted to know
who else had played a part in these mindless acts of destruction, so he asked me to turn in my so-called
friends. When I refused to grass them up, I was swiftly kicked out of university. Not one of my new
friends apologised for how the situation had played out, and this really got me

Exercise 6

.

Answers on p. 298

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

The price of gold shot up last week. It really got me

as I had just sold off the rest

of my gold investments before the price skyrocketed. I completely missed out on the rally.
2

If you want to get

on the oil price, you’ll have to buy up some shares soon.

3

Sherlock Holmes was determined to get

the bottom of the mystery and to fathom

out exactly what had happened.
4

When the news got

5

We ought to get

that the company would go bust, the share price plummeted.
to finishing the project, or else we’ll still be working on it next

year.
6

He gets

7

When I was getting

work at 18:00, so let’s meet up at 18:30.
the taxi, my sleeve got stuck

the door,

tearing off a couple of buttons.
8

The ferry docked at the Port of Calais, and we all had to get

and go through

customs.

• What kind of investments would you like to get in on at the moment?
• Do you think you got much out of your university studies?
• What time do you get off work (or school)?
• Have you ever got mixed up with a bad crowd?
• What kind of things usually get you down?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GET Phrasal Verbs

34

TAKE Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
take sth out of sth / put sth into sth (your
bag/pocket)

withdraw sth from sth / place sth inside sth

take sth off sth / put sth on sth (the table)

1) place sth on a horizontal surface or remove sth
from the surface.
2) remove clothes or the opposite

take sth down / put sth up

place on a vertical surface or remove from the
surface

take sth apart / put sth together

separate into pieces or build from pieces

take sth back

take sb back (similar to bring sb back)

1) return
2) retract
3) withdraw
4) make sb nostalgic about past

take sb aside (pull sb aside)

speak to sb privately (away from the group)

take sth off (fling sth off, sling sth off, throw sth
off). (opposite of put/throw/fling/sling sth on)
take off (no object)
take sb off

1) remove clothes
2) leave the ground (lift off. a plane takes off)
3) leave
4) do am impression of sb, mimic sb

take sth up (first meaning similar to get into sth)

1) start a hobby
2) fill/occupy space or time

take sth up with sb

complain to sb because of sth

take after sb

be similar to a relative (usually personality rather
than appearance)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TAKE Phrasal Verbs

35

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The meal didn’t live up to our expectations, so we
took this up with the manager.

Knowing that he would look foolish without upto-date information, she took him aside and filled
him in on the latest developments.

Don’t just leave all your junk lying around the
garage, taking up all that space. Find a space to
hide some of it away.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 298

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Taking

my hat and coat, I started to inspect the library around me; the room was

massive, and the bookshelves were crammed with books of all descriptions. The librarian was taking
a sign that exclaimed ‘silence’ and putting one

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TAKE Phrasal Verbs

in it’s place that said,

36

‘please turn

all mobile phones and devices’. I quietly took my book

of my bag and began reading; the book was ‘Lord of the Flies’, and the front cover took me
to my teenage years, because I had already read the book at school. The cover showed
Piggy’s broken glasses, hinting at the evil murder that would soon take place. As a boy, I had enjoyed
reading this story; however, as an adult, I understood that the book contained dangerous ideas that
legitimized man’s evil impulses as unavoidable desires.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 298

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

The soup that I had for the first course was disgusting; I took this

with the

manager, and they offered not to charge me for this meal.
2

I had to take

my old sofa in order to get it through the door of my new house.

3

I took my boss

4

All my old books were taking

as I wanted to say something to him in private.
far too much space, so I decided to stash them

away in the attic.
5

He takes

his father: they both work themselves into a state too quickly. They need

to learn to control their emotions.
6

When I was 14, I took

windsurfing; I loved it because I loved being on the beach,

and the air was so fresh when I was surfing the waves.

• If you had more free time, what new hobbies would you like to take up?
• Do you take after any members of your family?
• Can you think of anything that takes you back to your childhood?
• When was the last time you took something up with the manager?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TAKE Phrasal Verbs

37

Vocabulary
take sth away

1) remove an object to another location
2) subtract (opposite of add)

take over (no object)
take sth over from sb

gain control of sth from sb

take (sb) on (opposite of let sb go)
take on sth (opposite of get out of sth)

1) employ sb
2) accept a responsibility/task/duty

take sth in (similar to sink in)
take sb in

1) absorb (digest information)
2) deceive sb
3) accommodate and look after sb

take sb for (similar to mistake sb for, play sb for,
have sb down as)

perceive/believe sb to be

take sb up on sth (opposite of turn sth down)

accept an offer

take it out on sb

sb makes you angry, but you get angry and abuse
sb else

take it out of sb (similar to wear sb out, tire sb out,
knacker sb out)

exhaust sb

be taken aback

be shocked or surprised

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I took him up on his offer as soon as more money
was included in the deal.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TAKE Phrasal Verbs

38

Trudging through mud and wading through
shallow waters took it out of them, so they
stopped to catch their breath.

When she gets angry, she tends to take it out on
her younger sister.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 298

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Last week, my old boss stepped down, and I was hoping to take
happy to take

our department. I was

all the extra responsibilities because it meant a move up the pay scale and

a much bigger office. My paperwork had been piling up in cardboard boxes that were taking
far too much space, so a move into a bigger office sounded fantastic; however,
yesterday the CEO took me

and asked what I made of Peter, a colleague of mine. He

was interested in putting Peter in charge of the department, so he wanted to know if the rest of the
department got on with him. I was so taken

that I was speechless for a few seconds;

nevertheless, I managed to hold back my anger and tell him that Peter was a strong candidate and an easygoing colleague. Today, the CEO took me
his mind and would like me to take

once more and told me that he had changed
; I immediately took him

on the

offer.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TAKE Phrasal Verbs

39

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 298

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

The smell of plasticine always takes me

to my childhood; sometimes, I wish I had

never grown up.
2

While I was young, I would spend hours putting

models of tanks and boats and

planes; when they were finished, I would jazz them up with a lick of paint.
3

If she got angry, she would usually take it

4

When I got home I flung

on her younger siblings.
my jacket and tie, threw my keys and mobile on the

table, and collapsed on the sofa; the long day had really taken it
5

To learn phrasal verbs in detail, there is a large amount of vocabulary to take
indeed, it make take a few months to fully sink

6

of me.

I take

;

. But you won’t regret it.

my father; both of us are forthright, and we will speak out if we see good

reason to. Last week, I saw that the council had once again failed to collect the bins on time, so I
took the issue
7

with my local MP.

They took the great detective

a fool, and doing so was their greatest mistake. For

while he came across as an idiot, Columbo was not only a great detective but also a master tactician.
He knew that if he made out he was stupid, the culprit would be more likely to make a mistake.
8

The factory took

50 new employees last month. The managers hope to turn out

twice as many cars next year.

• Do you feel as though anyone has ever taken you for a fool?
• Have you ever been taken in by a trickster?
• Who do you tend to take your anger out on?
• When was the last time you felt taken aback?
• If you were offered a job with twice as much money and twice as many tasks, would you take
them up on the offer, or turn it down?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TAKE Phrasal Verbs

40

GIVE Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
give sth away

1) give and not expect to get back 2) reveal a
secret

give in (no object)
give in sth (in the third meaning)

1) passively surrender 2) stop resisting 3) give
document to the right place

give up (no object)
give up sth (in the second and third meaning)

1) actively surrender 2) stop trying to complete
sth 3) stop a bad habit

give up on sb/sth

1) stop hoping sb will improve, or survive
2) stop trying to complete sth (with object)

give sth back

1) return

give off sth

1) emit (sound or smell)

give sth out
give out
give out sth

1) distribute
2) machine stops working
3) occasionally used in the same way as give off
(emit)

give it up for…!

applaud (when a presenter introduces a performer)

give sb a ticking off (similar to tell sb off,
compare with have a go at sb)

scold sb for bad behaviour

give in to sth (very similar to cave in to)

yield or acquiesce to demands/emotions/desires

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GIVE Phrasal Verbs

41

Visual Phrasal Verbs

When we broke down on the motorway, the
engine started giving off a peculiar smell.

She gave in to temptation and wolfed down a
slice of pizza.

I reckon that the girls in the photo must be
French: their clothes and their croissants give
them away.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GIVE Phrasal Verbs

42

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 299

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

My children had been going on about the new theme park for months. In the end, I gave
to their demands and promised to take them out for a day. The theme park was 30 km away, and the kids
were bickering the whole way there. I had to give them a stern ticking
shut them up. Next, the car started giving

, which quickly

a strange smell, so I pulled over to have a

look under the bonnet. At first everything seemed OK, but when I pulled out into traffic, the engine gave
. In the end, we had to give

on the idea of the theme park, and I felt

guilty for letting the kids down even though it wasn’t my fault.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 299

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

Unfortunately, she fell in with a bad crowd as a teenager. She started falling behind the other pupils,
and eventually even her teachers gave

2

If the soldiers are captured, they might give

on her.
our position, thereby endangering a

vast number of lives.
3

If I don’t give

that library book soon, my mum will give me a ticking
. She has been going on at me to take it back for months.

4

The soldiers had been holed up for a number of weeks, and their enemies were attempting to flush
them out of their positions. They held out for about 24 days in total. In the end, they gave
on reinforcements showing up, and came out of their positions with the white flag
waving.

5

The doctor warned him to give

alcohol or face serious consequences, which

included the possibility that his heart would give
6

The teacher gave

.

the homework for next week. She then reminded us to look

through all the phrasal verbs we had already studied and learn them by heart.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GIVE Phrasal Verbs

43

• Would you say that you are the kind of person that usually gives in to the demands of others?
• Which bad habits would you like to give up?
• Were you ever given a stern ticking off while you were young? What had you been up to?
• Do you think your accent gives away your nationality when you speak?
• While you were at school, did any of your teachers give up on you?

COME Phrasal Verbs
Please remember that come phrasal verbs are very similar to bring phrasal verbs, but with one important
difference: come phrasal verbs are usually intransitive (they don’t have an object) while bring phrasal
verbs are transitive (they do have an object). Here are some examples:
come about, bring sth about (happen)
come round, bring sb round (persuade or regain consciousness)
come to, bring sb to (regain consciousness)
come out in, bring sb out in (develop a rash or other symptoms)
come off, bring sth off (happen successfully)
come along, bring sb along (accompany)
come out, bring sth out (publish or launch)
come back, bring sb back (return)

Vocabulary
come about (no object)

happen unexpectedly

come off (no object) (compare go down well)
(bring sth off, pull sh off)
come off better or worse

1) happen as planned

come up (similar to crop up, turn up, show up)

1) arise / appear
2) soon to occur
3) the sun comes up and goes down

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — COME Phrasal Verbs

2) end up (better or worse)

44

come across sth, come by sth (stumble on, happen
on, happen upon, stumble upon, stumble across)
come across as sth / sb (strike sb as, have sb down
as)

1) find sth by chance (compare with bump/run
into sb, run across sb = meet sb by chance)
2) appear to be, seem

come along (with sb) (go along with sb)

accompany (sb)

come down with sth

fall ill with sth

come into sth
(not) come into it

1) inherit
2) plays (no) part in this

come out (no object) (similar to bring sth out =
publish sth)

1) be published
2) appear
3) go out socially
4) sun/stars/moon appear from behind cloud
(opposite is go in)

come out with sth (compare with blurt sth out)

unexpectedly say sth spontaneously (comments,
remarks)

come up with sth (an idea/plan/suggestion)

have an idea/plan/suggestion

come out in, break out in, (bring sb out in sth)

when rash or sweat appears on the skin

come over to/up to (similar to
walk/go/run/dash/shoot/head up to)

approach

come round (no object) (bring sb round =
transitive)

1) regain consciousness
2) be persuaded (similar to bring sb round)

come to (bring sb to)
come to sth

1) regain consciousness
2) amounts to, adds up to

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — COME Phrasal Verbs

45

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Having tried a new washing powder, she came
out in a nasty rash. (The new washing powder
brought her out in a nasty rash)

She came down with flu, so she wrapped herself
up in blankets and heated up some delicious soup.

He came up with a great idea for his school
project.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 299

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

My niece was admitted to hospital last week as she had come
infection. Her parents first noticed the infection when her face came

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — COME Phrasal Verbs

with a nasty skin
in a rash. They

46

tried applying some cream, but this made the red marks come

even brighter than

before. In the end, they went to the hospital and found a specialist, and one who came
as very knowledgeable in his field. He asked how the symptoms had come

, but not one

of my relatives had the foggiest idea. He told them the rash could have been brought on by a new
cosmetic that my niece had been putting on her face. He handed over some new cream, but my niece
didn’t want to use any more skin creams. After some gentle persuasion she came

; and

after a few days of using the cream, the rash had faded away

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 299

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

When his great uncle died, he came

2

He’s a peculiar person that comes

a fortune, so he splashed out on a new car.
with the strangest things when you’d least

expect it.
3

How did last night’s fire come

4

The shock was so great that our protagonist passed out. But within a few seconds, he was already
coming

5

Their success comes

?

.
to their skill. Luck doesn’t come

it. Talent

is what it all hinges on. And talent boils down to training.
6

We bought in lots of food, sorted out loads of games, and asked over hundreds of people, but the
party didn’t come

7

as well as we had hoped.

The weatherman says that the rain will hold off and the sun will come

in an hour

or two.
8

We’re going on a trip. Would you like to come

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — COME Phrasal Verbs

?

47

• Have you ever come out with something embarrassing and then regretted it?
• What was the last infection you came down with? What were your symptoms?
• How do you think you come across in meetings? What about your colleagues and boss?
• Did your last holiday come off as planned?
• At this time of year, when does the sun come up and go down?

Vocabulary
come through (compare with get through sth, pull
through, see sth through)

1) succeed in spite of difficulty
2) survive in spite of poor health

come out against sth (speak out against sth)

criticize publicly

come down to sth (boil down to, hinge on)
(compare with put sth down to sth)

be caused by, or ultimately depends on

come at sb, fly at sb, run at sb (similar to hit out at
sth, lash out at sth/sb)
come at (e.g a problem)

1) attack

come down on sth, clamp down on sth, crack
down on sth
come down (no object)

1) tighten laws and punish offenders more harshly
2) when a price is reduced

come on (similar to ‘come off it’ when used in the
second meaning) (no object)

1) used to encourage sb
2) when you don’t believe sb
3) rain can come on (opposite of hold off)
4) lights/machines suddenly start working
5) make progress or improve

come up to (similar to live up to)

reach the required standards

come up against, go up against, run up against, be
up against

encounter difficulties or obstacles

come in for sth (similar to be in for sth)

receive sth (usually blame or criticism)

come over sb

when an emotion takes over and you get carried
away.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — COME Phrasal Verbs

2) approach

48

come between sb

something spoils the relationship between people
(separates 2 people)c

come back
come back to sb
come back with sth

1) return, happen again
2) remember once again
3) reply

come into one’s own

become very successful

come off sth

stop using medicine or drugs

come of sth

result from sth

come under sth
(come under criticism, scrutiny, pressure from)

be subjected to sth

come away with (an impression)

be left with sth

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I think the authorities should come down more
heavily on those who drive under the influence of
alcohol; many of them just get a small fine.

The problem of homelessness often comes down
to a lack of affordable housing. (I put the problem
of homelessness down to a lack of affordable
housing.)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — COME Phrasal Verbs

49

The President of the European Commission came
under criticism (came in for criticism) on account
of comments that he had made regarding Brexit.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 299

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

The Secretary of State for Education came

for severe criticism today when he asserted

on Twitter that European education standards didn’t come
opposition MPs came

to British standards. Several

against the minister, calling on him to step down. A Liberal

Democrat claimed that Britain would come

against difficulties during future

negotiations because of these barbed comments, even suggesting that we may not get through Brexit with
a free trade agreement. The Prime Minister is expected to rein in the members of her party, coming
heavily on their irresponsible use of social media.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 299

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

I’m really sorry! I don’t know what came

me. When I saw the pickpocket creep

up on her and fish out her mobile, I got carried away and lashed out at him.
2

The police ought to come

more heavily on those managers of firms that have a

poor safety record. If the firms’ health and safety procedures don’t come

to the

required standard, they ought not to get away with it.
3

I broke

in a rash the day after I came down

the flu. So, I

popped into the chemist’s to pick up some medicine.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — COME Phrasal Verbs

50

4

You’ll probably come up

a few difficulties in question three, but if you come

the problem in a rational and methodical way, you ought to be able to figure it
out.
5

The mugger, brandishing a large blade, came

to the passer-by and quickly

snatched the phone out of her hands. The victim, in fear for her life, just froze up. There were
several onlookers, but no one was brave enough to make after the thief.
6

Several politicians came

against the idea of a second referendum, claiming that

another vote would undermine democracy. Theresa May has ruled out a second vote under all
circumstances.
7

I can’t remember his name at the moment, but if I stop dwelling on it, I’m sure it’ll come
to me.

8

The minister has come

a great deal of scrutiny since making those comments.

• What should the police in your area come down more heavily on?
• Do you think that success in life comes down to talent, luck, or effort?
• ‘A cash box contains some coins to the value of £5.25. There are twice as many 5p coins as 2p
coins, and twice as many 2p coins as 1p coins. If I asked you to work out the number of 5p’s,
2p’s, and 1p’s, how would you come at the problem?
• Have you come up against any difficulties at work recently?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — COME Phrasal Verbs

51

PUT Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
put sth on (opp. take sth off)
put on (that)

1) dress 2) switch sth on
3) pretend (make out that)

put sth across, put sth forward (similar to get
across)

convey sth (an idea)

put sth down (opp. pick sth up)
put sb down (get sb down, bring sb down, run sb
down)

1) place on surface 2) write sth down (jot down,
note down, set down)
3) criticise or insult sb
4) kill an animal out of mercy

put sth away
put sb away

1) put in its place (tidy up)
2) put sb in prison

put sb up
put sth up (opp. take sth down)

1) accommodate sb
2) assemble (e.g a tent) 3) place on vertical
surface

put sth off (opp. bring sth forward) (compare with
put sth back, set sth back)

1) postpone 2) distract 3) stop you from liking sth
(compare ‘go off’) 4) turn sth off

put sth out

put sb out

1) extinguish a fire 2) turn off a light 3) publish /
release onto the market (similar to bring sth out,
roll sth out, come out)
4) inconvenience sb (impose on sb)

put sb through

connect

put up with sb

tolerate

put sth by, put sth aside (set sth by, set sth aside,
lay by, lay sth aside)

save money/time/resources for a future time

put sb down for sth (compare with write sth down) write sb’s name and what they will have (sth) on a
list
put sth down to sth (similar to come down to)

explain the cause of sth

put sth behind sb

let go of painful memories

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — PUT Phrasal Verbs

52

put sth together (similar to cobble sth together)
(opp. take sth apart)

assemble

put sb down as sth, have sb down as sth (compare
strike sb as, have sb pegged as, come across as sb)

consider sb to be

put sb up to (similar to be up to sth, get up to sth)

provoke sb to do sth naughty

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I’m putting aside some money every month for
the tax man.

It took the firemen 3 hours to put out the raging
inferno.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — PUT Phrasal Verbs

53

‘I hope you don’t mind my showing up out of the
blue, but can you put me up for a few days? I
don’t want to put you out, of course.’

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 300

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Many people put the problem of youth-homelessness

to poverty, but many other factors

can play a part. Some adolescents come up against difficulties when their parents, angry with their
offspring for one reason or another, kick them out of the house. They may feel embarrassed to ask other
members of their family for help, as they may not want to put them
in the family is willing to put them

. And if no one else

, they are unlikely to find a home. Other teenagers

have parents that are hooked on narcotics or alcohol. If the parent of the child refuses to give up or cut
down, the child may be unable to put up
Lastly, the child may have been put

their behaviour and thereby leave home.
(and even beaten up) by other family members,

and this may be the reason they ran away from home.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 300

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

If you want to splash out on a new bike at the end of the year, you’ll have to start putting a few quid
each week.

2

I wanted to put
or put

the idea that we ought to either take on some more staff members
the deadline for the completion of the project.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — PUT Phrasal Verbs

54

3

Last night, there was a fire in the warehouse and the entire building burnt down. For several hours
the fireman were unable to put

the blaze. They put the cause of the fire

to an electrical fault.
4

I’m going to Chester and my sister has offered to put me

for a night, but I didn’t

really want to impose on her family. I feel like I’d be putting them
5

I don’t know how you put

.

with his behaviour; he’s always messing around and

lashing out at the other children.
6

If you don’t mind waiting, we can put you

in 20 minutes. Or, you can call back in

half an hour.
7

My wife will have steak and please, put me

for the fish.

8

He was throwing pieces of paper at the teacher while she was writing on the board. However, when
the teacher turned round and caught him red handed, he claimed that his friend had put him
to it. The teacher decided to punish them both.

• What kind of behaviour do you find extremely difficult to put up with?
• Did you enjoy putting together models as a child?
• If a relative asked you to put him or her up for a few days, would you agree? Or would you feel
like he or she were putting you out?
• What do you put homelessness down to?
• Do you know anyone that has been put away for a few years?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — PUT Phrasal Verbs

55

RUN Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
run after sb (drive after, go after)

chase

run around

run in various directions, without purpose

run around after sb (compare clean up after)

do a lot of things for sb. (similar to spoil, pamper
or fuss over sb)

run away (from sb or sw)

escape/go forever

run away with sb
(In the second meaning, compare with get carried
away, come over, work yourself up)

1) secretly leave a place so you can live together
2) when an emotion or your imagination takes
over

run off (no object)
run off (sth)

1) leave (once, and possibly come back) 2) do
some photocopies

run up to / over to sb or sw (similar to
walk/go/come/dash/shoot/head/drive up to)

approach quickly

run up (a huge bill)

continually spend money creating a huge bill

run back and forth

run in one direction and then the opposite

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The lion ran after the zebra, closing in on its prey
with astonishing speed.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — RUN Phrasal Verbs

56

We ran up a huge bill at the restaurant, ordering
as much food as possible because our company
was paying for everything.

Unfortunately, I got so worked-up that my anger
ran away with me; I ended up saying some things
that I regretted.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 300

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I often dream about packing in my job. The main duties are running
photocopies, running

hundreds of

and forth around the office, and running

my boss. Last week, I let my emotions run

after

with me; I blurted out that the management

ought to consider taking on more staff members to cope with the increasing workload. Faces immediately
clouded over as no one from management really wanted to run

more expenses than

were absolutely necessary.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 300

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

I cringe every time I see his parents running around

him. They are bringing up a

monster!

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — RUN Phrasal Verbs

57

2

As you can see, I let my imagination run away

me for this poem.

3

She ran up

4

The police ran

5

He ran

6

If we keep on buying all this pricey food and drink, we are going to run

me, brimming with enthusiasm and grinning from ear to ear.
the pickpocket, but they couldn’t catch up with him.
from home after his dad had a go at him, but came back a few days later.
a huge

bill.

• When was the last time you ate out? Did you run up a huge bill? How much did it set you back?
• Do you know any parents who run around after their children?
• Under what circumstances do your emotions run away with you?
• Did you ever run away from home in your childhood?

Vocabulary
run sb over, run sb down, knock sb over, knock sb
down

hit sb in a car

to be run on

to be powered by

run for/against

participate in an election for a party or participate
against sb

run through sth
run sb through

1) explain or read something briefly (go through)
2) spend money quickly
3) kill sb with a sword (archaic)

run into / across sb

bump into sb (meet unexpectedly)

run out of sth

have nothing left of sth

run sb down, wear sb down, wear sb out, tire sb
out
run sb down, bring sb down, get sb down, put sb
down
run sth down
run-down (adjective)

1) exhaust sb

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — RUN Phrasal Verbs

2) criticize, insult or depress sb
3) to lose energy, power or strength
The adjective means 1) tired, exhausted 2) derelict
or in bad condition

58

run up against sth, come up against sth, go up
against sth

encounter difficulties.

run sth by/past sb (similar to sound sb out)

To tell sb about sth and find out their opinion, or
get their approval

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I came up with a new sales strategy, but I had to
run it by my boss first.

The building that he lived in was in a run-down
part of town, and most of the walls were crawling
with graffiti.

By the second year of her course, she was feeling
particularly run-down; new assignments were
piling up faster than she was handing them in.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — RUN Phrasal Verbs

59

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 300

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Unfortunately, on the way back we ran

against several obstacles. Firstly, we ran

of petrol on the motorway, so I had to run

to the nearest petrol station

and buy some more. Next, I filled the tank up with petrol, but my new car runs

diesel,

and this had slipped my mind when I was in the petrol station. So, when I tried to start the car, the fuel
system got clogged up with the wrong fuel. I had to call out the repair service once again. I ran
so much money just trying to sort out my car; in future, I will jump on my bike instead.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 300

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

In the meeting, we ran

all the details of next month’s project.

2

I came down with flu at the beginning of February and this left me feeling run-

for

a few weeks.
3

Before you publish the book, run some of the ideas

your audience to see if the

book is likely to go down well.
4

Hilary Clinton ran

Donald Trump in the last US election.

5

I ran

6

Her mother is always running her

7

I forgot to turn off the headlights so the batteries have run

8

He came into a fortune when his uncle died, but he ran

an old school mate while I was heading into town.
; she needs to learn to stand up for herself.
.
it all in a matter of

months, splashing out on all sorts of exorbitant treats, indulging himself with the finest food and
drink, and living in the lap of luxury.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — RUN Phrasal Verbs

60

• What kind of products have you run out of? When will you stock up on them?
• Would you like to run for president? What kind of laws would you bring in?
• Do you know anyone that has run someone or something over? Have you ever been knocked
down?
• Does your car run on diesel or petrol?
• When was the last time you ran into someone unexpectedly?

SET Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
set sth aside, set sth by, put sth aside, put sth by,
lay sth aside

1) save time, money, or resources, for the future
2) place sth to one side as you will need it in a
moment

set about sth

start doing sth

set sth out (lay sth out)

1) explain 2) position in order (similar to spread
sth out)
3) leave
4) start a grandiose project with the intention of
finishing it

set out (no object) (same as set off)
set out to do sth
set sth down (put sth down, jot sth down)

1) write sth down 2) put sth down (on a table)

set apart (from sth/sb)

distinguish (from sb)

set sth forth (similar to put sth forth, set sth out,
lay sth out)
set forth (no object)

1) explain or define 2) put sth across

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — SET Phrasal Verbs

3) start a journey

61

set sth up (similar to put sth up)
set sb up (pin sth on sb)

1) install or assemble 2) make arrangements 3)
start a business
4) frame sb
5) matchmake
6) give sb money to start a business

set on sb, set upon sb, (run at sb, come at sb, lash
out at sb, hit out at sb)

attack sb

set sth (off) against sth

offset (compensated by)

set against sth

be opposed to

set in (no object) (noun form is ‘onset’)

start of something unpleasant (winter, disease)

set sb back

be set back

1) delay, or hinder progress (similar to hold sb
back)
2) cost
3) be further back from the road

set off (no object)
set sth off (compare go off without object)

1) leave
2) activate (bombs, alarms, fireworks)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Being an ambitious man, he set out to reach the
very top echelon of the company.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — SET Phrasal Verbs

62

We set about doing the washing up, brimming
with enthusiasm.

This contract sets out (or lays out, sets forth, puts
forth) all the terms and conditions of your
mortgage; please, read through it carefully.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 301

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

The following document sets

all the terms and conditions of the loan. You’ll be

expected to pay it off over a series of monthly instalments, so please set

a direct debit

with your bank. Should you fall behind with your repayments, the penalties for doing so are also clearly
set

in the document. If you are planning to spend the loan on business equipment,

please remember that such purchases can be set

against tax. What sets us

from the other short-term-loan providers is that we guarantee the lowest interest rates
on the market.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — SET Phrasal Verbs

63

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 301

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

Creeping through the undergrowth, the soldier unwittingly tripped over a wire, setting
a bomb that blew him to smithereens.

2

Winter will be setting

soon, so we ought to find shelter from the elements.

3

My last computer set me

4

The police tried to set the suspect

5

Her skilful use of poetic language sets her

500 quid.
by planting a gun in his pocket.
from the other members of the

debating society.
6

He set

to become the best lawyer in the business, but he soon discovered that his

oratory skills weren’t up to it.
7

I set

washing the dishes and tidying up as I knew my auntie was going to pop

round.
8

When I came back to the UK, I decided to set

an online business so that I could

work for myself and work from home.

• How much time do you set aside for learning English?
• Which skills and qualities set you apart from your colleagues?
• Have you ever been set upon? What happened? Were you able to fend off the attackers?
• How much did your computer set you back?
• What time did you set off for work this morning?
• Are you able to clearly set forth your ideas in a meeting?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — SET Phrasal Verbs

64

KEEP Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
keep sb abreast of sth (the news)

keep sb informed about (keep sb in the loop)

keep at sth (similar to work at sth)

persist in doing (in order to improve or finish)

keep on ___ing (carry on, go on)

continue doing sth

keep on at sb about sth (go/drone/be/rabbit/bang
on at sb about sth)

nag or constantly criticize sb about sth

keep up with sth (opposite of lag behind, fall
behind)

1) stay level with 2) stay up to date 3) stay
informed

keep up (with sb)

1) stay level with someone 2) maintain the effort
(keep it up!)
3) keep sb awake
4) not allow sth to decrease or lower

keep sb up
keep sth up
keep sth back (similar to hold sth back, hold out
on sb)

withhold information

keep to yourself
keep sth to yourself

1) avoid interaction with others
2) avoid telling others

keep to sth, stick to sth

do what you have promised or planned, or
maintain the same course of action

keep out (similar to keep away from)
keep sb out

1) not go in a place
2) stop sb from entering

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — KEEP Phrasal Verbs

65

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Even though there’s a lot of work to plough
through, if you keep at it you will get through it.

If you keep to a healthy diet and work off some
calories in the gym, you are bound to stay in good
shape.

He was the kind of person who preferred to keep
to himself while others were chatting away.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 301

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I enjoy reading and listening to UK and US media online; not only do they keep me
what’s happening around the world, but they also enable me to keep

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — KEEP Phrasal Verbs

of
with the other

66

students in my English-language classes. At the moment, news sources keep

about the

recent boxing match that ended when one boxer didn’t keep his guard

, so he was

knocked out in the first round. He landed up in a coma, with the doctors not knowing if he’d ever come
round. The press have been kept

of the hospital, so there have been no photos in the

newspapers.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 301

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

I can let you in on a little secret, but you must keep it

yourself.

2

Over the last few weeks your English has really come on. If you keep

a routine of

about three hours a week, you’ll be ready for the exam.
3

The project looked like it would never be completed, but I kept

it, finishing it off

at two in the morning.
4

The neighbours were having a party, and the music was blasting out till the early hours. Eventually
the party died down, but the noise had kept me

5

My mum keeps on

for half the night.

me about clearing up the mess in my room, so I ought to put

my stuff away first.
6

I think current geopolitical events will keep

the price of oil and shore up the value

of the currency.
7

Keep

a regular schedule, keep

the exercises, keep

the effort, and you are sure to get through the exam. You might even sail through
it.
8

If you only just scrape through the exam, you may find it difficult to keep

with

the other students on this course.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — KEEP Phrasal Verbs

67

• How do you keep abreast of what's going on in the world?
• When you set about a difficult task, do you tend to keep at it until it's done, or give up at the first
hurdle?
• Do you manage to keep to the schedule at work, or do you often fall behind?
• Do you tend to keep secrets to yourself, or do you prefer to let others in on them?
• Who keeps on at you, and what do they keep on about?

Vocabulary
keep it together

maintain composure and not get carried away

keep in with sb

continue being friendly with sb (in order to gain
advantage)

keep sb from
keep sth from sb (compare with hold sth back,
hold out on sb, not let on)

1) prevent sb from doing sth
2) not to let sb know sth

keep sth down

1) be quiet (compare quieten/calm/die down)
2) prevent from increasing
3) resist urge to vomit

keep (sb) back

remain at a distance

keep sb in/out

make sure sb stays outside or inside

keep out of sth, stay out of sth

remain uninvolved, not get mixed up in

keep ahead (of sb)

remain in front (of sb)

keep sb off sth

make sure sb doesn’t start a bad habit

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — KEEP Phrasal Verbs

68

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Even though the suspect came across as
confident, the detective was certain that he was
keeping something from him. (or, ‘holding out on
him’)

When a fight breaks out, it’s always better to keep
out of it.

The neighbours were belting out music last night;
I had to bang on their door and tell them to keep
it down.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 301

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

A fight broke out at a cafe yesterday involving two footballers and a civil servant. CCTV Footage shows
that the official was gobbling up his fry-up when the two men and their friends flooded into the cafe,

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — KEEP Phrasal Verbs

69

swearing, shouting, and acting aggressively. Their behaviour was keeping the civil servant
enjoying his meal, so he walked over to their table and politely asked them to keep the
noise

. However, he should have kept

of it, for the footballers’

response was brutal. They lashed out at him with punches and kicks, even throwing chairs and tables at
him. The footballers’ friends tried to keep the angry young men

, but to no avail. The

victim passed out in the attack and is currently recovering in hospital. The doctors think he is likely to
pull through, though he may require a wheelchair.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 301

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

To avoid putting on weight, it’s necessary to keep

certain types of food and drink.

2

The pupil had been playing up all lesson, so his teacher decided to keep him

for

the lunch break.
3

The church bells were pealing out, and they were keeping me

finishing an

excellent book.
4

The detective could tell that the suspect was keeping something

him; he needed

to employ a method that would drag the truth out of him.
5

If a fight breaks out, you ought to keep

of it. Getting mixed up in these battles is

the worst thing you can do. If you are threatened, try to keep it
6

He regularly drops by his auntie’s house as he is doing his best to keep

and walk away.
with that

side of the family. He thinks that he may come into their money one day.

• Who or what keeps you from achieving your short term goals?
• Do your neighbours keep the noise down at night?
• Do you prefer to keep out of fights, or are you often dragged into them?
• What policies should the government roll out to keep unemployment down?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — KEEP Phrasal Verbs

70

GO Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
go with sb or sth

1) accompany 2) suit

go on
go on, carry on, keep on

1) happen (intransitive)
2) continue (with gerund)

go on for, carry on for (compare with drag on for)

last for (+ duration)

go on at sb about sth (whine, ramble, keep, waffle,
rabbit, drone, harp on at sb about sth)

nag or constantly criticize sb about sth

go ahead (with sth)

proceed

go through sth,
run through sth, go through/over sth (compare
with pore over sth which means examine
carefully) (also skim / leaf / flick / thumb /
browse through sth)

1) experience sth painful or difficult
2) examine sth briefly

go through with sth

proceed in spite of difficulty.

go for sb or sth

1) attack or criticize
2) aim for
3) be sold for
4) choose (compare with ‘put me down for sth)

go in for sth

participate

go without sth (live without sth, do without sth)
(also, compare with part with sth)

cope with not having sth

go out (compare with put the lights out, put a fire
out)

1) socialize
2) stop giving light
3) stop burning
4) leave a room / building

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GO Phrasal Verbs

71

go off (compare with set sth off and let sth off
which are transitive)

1) be activated; bombs, fireworks and alarms all
go off.
2) leave
3) happen as planned (compare with go down)
4) stop liking (opposite of warm to)

(similar to take against sb)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

We spent a long time buying food and drink in for
the party, so I am pleased that it went off exactly
as we planned.

When her parents split up, she went through a
difficult period.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GO Phrasal Verbs

72

She constantly goes on at him about the house
being in a mess, but he just shrugs off her
comments.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 301

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Last night, I heard fireworks going

, so I went

to see what was going

. I could hear music belting out from my neighbours garden, and when I peered over the
fence, I saw they were having a bonfire party. This surprised me as it was chucking it down, and all the
guests were soaked through. The host, who was setting off fireworks, must have decided to go
with the party in spite of the rain. The party went

for another 3 or 4

hours before people started to head back home.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 302

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

Moving home can be a very difficult experience to go

2

The fire went

.

burning for another half an hour, but eventually it went
.

3

When I was growing up, I had my hair tied back in a pony tail, and my dad would go
at me about getting my hair cut.

4

I don’t think I could go

5

I’m not sure that we should go

my mobile nowadays. I can’t sort anything out without it.
with this plan. There are many things that could

go wrong.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GO Phrasal Verbs

73

Having run through the requirements, and having briefly run them past my superiors, I am pleased

6

to say we shall go

with the project.

7

Your tie goes

the colour of your eyes. You look good when you dress up.

8

When she got pregnant, her diet changed and she craved for new foods. However, she went
chocolate and cakes.

• What’s the most difficult experience that you have ever gone through?
• How long do the meetings at work go on for? Does it feel like they drag on?
• When was the last time you threw a party? Did it go off well??
• If I went through your CV, what kind of work experience would I see?
• How long would you be able to go without your phone?
• If you had to work abroad and not see your family for some time, would you be able to go
through with it?

Vocabulary
go down (well with sb)
go down (no object)
go down sth

1) be received by people well or badly
2) decrease
3) descend

go down for sth (send sb down for sth)
go down (in history) for sth or as sb

1) go to prison for (crime OR duration)
2) be renowned for (or as)

go by

1) pass by
2) be named
3) ‘going by’ means ‘according to’

go after sb (run after sb)

chase sb

go back over sth, go back through sth, run back
through sth

examine briefly once again

1) go into sw
2) go into sth

1) enter sw
2) discuss sth in detail

go back on sth (e.g your word)

fail to keep a promise

go around sth (compare with skirt around)

1) physically avoid (skirt around = mentally

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GO Phrasal Verbs

74

go around/about doing sth
go around (no object)

avoid)
2) spend time doing sth unpleasant
3) spread (especially news, compare get around)

go along with sb
go along with sth (compare with play along with
sth)

1) accompany sb
2) assume for argument’s sake that a dubious idea
(sth) is actually true
3) genuinely support sth (an idea)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

He was charged with burglary, and he went down
for 2 years.

Today’s date will go down in history as the first
day that women have been able to vote in an
election.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GO Phrasal Verbs

75

As a teenager, he went around spraying graffiti all
over the buildings by the train lines.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 302

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I don’t really want to go

the details, but three young men went

my

cousin, and one of them was armed with a knife. My cousin managed to fend them off, using his briefcase
as a make-do shield. There are often youngsters in that area who go

looking for a fight,

so this event came as no surprise to me. The police actually managed to catch up with the attackers on
that same night, and it looks as though the armed attacker could go

for 6 months or

even a year. Personally, I think the judge ought to send him down for even longer.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 302

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

My name is Felix, but on YouTube I go

the handle ‘PewDiePie’.

2

Jack the Ripper went

in history as the world’s first serial killer.

3

If you keep going

on your promises, nobody will take you seriously.

4

I thought that the food at the party went

5

If you keep going

6

I don’t like him as he often goes

really well with the guests.

over these phrasal verbs, they will start to sink in.
boasting about how great he is. He comes across

as arrogant and stuck-up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — GO Phrasal Verbs

76

• When someone goes down for murder, how long should they be sent down for?
• Have you ever performed in public? Did the performance go down well?
• How often do you go back over old vocabulary?
• Do you think the price of housing in your area will go up or down soon?
• Do you go along with the theory that the universe is 15 billion years old?
• What nicknames do you go by online?
• Do you know anyone who goes around making nasty comments?

TURN Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
turn sb away
turn away

1) not allow sb to enter
2) look away

turn (sth) around, turn around (no object), spin
round
turn sth round

1) rotate in the vertical plane (compare with turn
over)
2) take sth (e.g a business) that is failing and make
it successful

turn sth over (flip sth over)
turn over sth

1) rotate in horizontal plane
2) relinquish a weapon, hand it in
3) produce or manufacture (similar to turn out)
4) generate revenue via sales
5) think over (mull over, muse over, churn over)
6) deliver sb to authorities

turn sb over to (the police)
turn sth down

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TURN Phrasal Verbs

1) reduce volume
2) refuse an offer

77

turn sth in
turn sb in (similar to dob sb in, grass sb up, inform
on sb, rat on sb, snitch on sb)
turn in (no object)

1) hand sth in
2) deliver sb to the police (also turn sb over to sb)

Turn (sth) into sth (make sb into sth)

transform (sth) into sth

turn on sth

turn on sb

1) switch on sth
2) hinge on sth or depend on sth (boil down to)
3) suddenly attack a friend or former ally.
4) arouse sexually

turn off sth
turn sb off

1) switch off sth
2) disgust or repel sb (especially sexually)

turn up (show up)
turn sth up

1) arrive or appear
2) increase volume
3) find sth after a long search (less common)

turn to sth
turn to sb

1) degenerate into sth
2) consult sb you trust for advice (opposite of turn
sb away)

turn out
turn sth out (compare go out without object)
turn sth out, churn sth out, turn over
turn sb out

1) end or become apparent
2) turn off a light
3) produce or make

3) go to bed

4) eject or evict (similar to turn sb away)
turn sth back
turn sb back
turn back

1) return to previous state or time
2) repel or drive away
3) retrace steps (similar to double back)

turn against sb, turn on sb

attack sb that you previously liked or supported

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TURN Phrasal Verbs

78

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I lost control of the steering wheel and veered off
the road, where the car turned over, lying on it’s
roof.

Whenever I come down with something, I turn to
my doctor for advice.

We didn’t get to the night club until midnight, and
by that time, the place was full; they turned us
away as there was no space for us.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TURN Phrasal Verbs

79

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 302

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

If I could turn

the clock, I would probably go back to when I was 21 years old, just

before I had that accident and landed myself in hospital. My car had veered off the road and completely
turned

so that I was upside down when the fire service arrived. I was so seriously

injured that I had to remain in hospital for 2 weeks. Word soon got around that I had been drinking before
the accident, and many of my former friends turned

me. I turned

at

my best friend’s doorstep once I had got over my injuries, but he simply turned me

,

refusing to even speak to me.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 302

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

If you knew that your friend was getting up to all sorts of serious crimes, would you turn him
?

2

That factory has been turning

aircraft since the 1950s.

3

Don’t worry if you can’t find your keys. I am sure they will turn

somewhere

when you settle down.
4

We got to the nightclub at 12:30, but we were turned

. Apparently they stop letting

people in after midnight.
5

I heard a faint voice calling, but I couldn’t make out what was being said. On turning
, I saw that it was an old friend that I hadn’t bumped into in ages.

6

He usually turned

his uncle if he needed help, so he asked his uncle to put him

up, and his uncle agreed. A few days later, his uncle got fed up with his bad habits, and turned him
in the middle of the night.
7

The police were rummaging through his belongings, but they didn’t turn

any

incriminating evidence.
8

She had really knuckled down in order to pass the test, brushing up on all aspects of the course. The
exam turned

to be really easy, so she sailed through it, passing with flying

colours.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TURN Phrasal Verbs

80

• What time do you usually turn in on a week-night?
• Have you ever been turned away from a bar, restaurant, or night club? Why?
• Who do you usually turn to at difficult times of your life?
• What kind of physical features do you find a turn-off and a turn-on?
• How much did your company turn over last year?
• Have you ever turned down a job offer? Why?
• If you could turn back time, what kind of things would you change in your life?
• Do you expect the voter turn-out to be high or low in the next election?
• If you knew that your friend was getting up to all sorts of serious crimes, would you turn him in?

BRING Phrasal Verbs
Please remember that come phrasal verbs are very similar to bring phrasal verbs, but with one important
difference: come phrasal verbs are usually intransitive (they don’t have an object) while bring phrasal
verbs are transitive (they do have an object). Here are some examples:
come about, bring sth about (happen)
come round, bring sb round (persuade or regain consciousness)
come to, bring sb to (regain consciousness)
come out in sth, bring sb out in sth (develop a rash or other symptoms)
come off, bring sth off (happen successfully)
come along, bring sb along (accompany)
come out, bring sth out (publish or launch)
come back, bring sb back (return)

Vocabulary
bring sb up (noun = upbringing)
bring sth up
bring up (throw up, yack up)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BRING Phrasal Verbs

1) to look after a child until adulthood
2) to mention
3) vomit

81

bring sb/sth round (compare with come round,
which is intransitive)
(compare with talk sb into, win sb over in third
meaning)

1) take sth round
2) regain consciousness
3) persuade or convince sb

bring sb to (synonym of bring sb round, compare
with come to, which is intransitive)

regain consciousness

bring sth about (similar to bring sth on, lead to sth, cause to happen
result in sth, spark sth off, give rise to sth)
bring sth off (similar to pull sth off, carry sth off)

accomplish sth difficult.

bring sth out
(‘come out’ is intransitive)

1) evoke
2) publish

bring sb out in spots/a rash (similar to come out in
which is intransitive)

cause a rash or spots to appear

bring sth on (similar to bring sth about)

cause sth to happen (often something bad)

bring sth in (similar to roll out)

1) introduce new legislation
2) attract (e.g new customers) compare with reel
sb in

bring sth forth

1) cause to happen (similar to bring sth on and
bring sth about)
2) create or generate

bring sth/sb down

1) topple or overthrow
2) depress (get sb down, put sb down, run sb
down)
3) reduce (go down)
4) make sb fall over (knock sb down)

bring sb/sth back
(similar to flood back, summon sth up, call sth up,
stir sth up, conjure sth up in the second meaning)

1) fetch sth
2) remember sth
3) re-enact old law
4) revive sb

bring sth forward

make a meeting earlier than planned (compare
with put sth off)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BRING Phrasal Verbs

82

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The minister spoke out against tax avoidance,
announcing that the government was bringing in
legislation to make large companies pay the full
amount of tax.

His mother tried her best to bring him round, but
he wouldn’t listen. He takes after his father in that
they are both stubborn.

The boy’s mother was often snowed under at
work, so it was his father that brought him up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BRING Phrasal Verbs

83

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 302

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Members of parliament have been asked to mull over the consequences of bringing

a

35-hour working week. During the discussion, which has been brought

to Friday the

28th so as not to clash with other debates, the Liberal Democrats hope to bring

MPs

from the Labour Party. However, they will need to proceed cautiously, or else several members of their
own party may turn against them. Several politicians have pointed out that such legislation would bring
massive changes, that the legislation would need to be phased in over a long period,
and that this new bill would be unlikely to get through the House of Lords. In summary, it remains
doubtful that the Liberal Democrats will be able to bring this

.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 303

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

Both my parents passed away while I was still young; my grandparents brought me
.

2

The downsizing of several large firms has sparked off a wave of redundancies, bringing
a spike in the unemployment figures.

3

He has cheered up since he started going out with her; she brings

the very best in

him.
4

Conspirators attempted to blow up parliament, thereby bringing

King James and

the Church of England.
5

The smell of paint always brings me

to my childhood; I have been into painting

for as long as I can remember.
6

The referee decided that the player had dived, so he didn’t give a free kick, but I’m sure that the
man was brought

7

.

I have already brought

the idea of splashing out on a new car several times, but

she’d rather put the money aside for a second holiday; it’s going to be really difficult to bring her
.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BRING Phrasal Verbs

84

8

Some politicians have even put forward the idea of bringing

capital punishment,

but it is unlikely they will win over their peers on this issue.

• If your friend were unconscious, how would you bring him round?
• What kinds of things bring back memories of your childhood?
• Where were you brought up? Who brought you up?
• Would you like to bring back capital punishment?
• What new laws should be brought in?
• What outcomes would higher taxes bring about?
• If you had to pass an advanced English exam, would you be able to bring it off?
• If I brought out a new phrasal verb book, would you buy it?

SEE Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
see beyond sth
not see beyond sth (usually criticism)

1) predict
2) see further than sth
3) not able to focus attention sw else

see sb in, show sb in, let sb in

allow sb to come in

see sth in
see in sb

1) celebrate at home
2) believe sb to have a particular quality

see into sth

1) predict the future
2) see into a room

see sb off (see sb out, show sb out, let sb out)
(very similar to fight sb off, fend sb off, ward sb
off)

1) accompany a guest on his way out
2) defeat sb
3) overpower sb

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — SEE Phrasal Verbs

85

see sb out
see sth out (see sth through)

1) see sb off
2) persist with an activity until it is complete

see over

1) look over (inspect a house, very rare)

see through sth/sb
see sth through (similar to get through, go
through, pull through)
see sb through until

1) look through
2) see clearly, not be deceived
1) persist with a difficult activity until it is
complete
2) be enough for sb to last until

see to sth
see to sb

1) deal with or take responsibility for sth
2) serve sb

see about sth (similar to deal with, sort out)

arrange for sth to be done

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I don’t think we have enough toilet paper to see
us through until Friday; I’ll dash down the shops
and buy some more.

He works in a care home for the elderly, and his
duties include seeing to the guests and making
sure they are comfortable.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — SEE Phrasal Verbs

86

I need to see about having the car washed before
we head off to Greece for a holiday.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 303

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

We decided to see the New Year

for a change, so we bought in loads of food and drink

and rang up everyone that we knew to invite them over for the party. We bought 20 bottles of Champagne
and 2 crates of beer, but I wasn’t sure that the beer would see us

the whole night. So, I

called a couple of mates and asked them to stock up on beers on their way round to our place. During the
party, I saw

all the guests, topping up their glasses and passing round the nibbles. My

wife saw

the younger kids, sorting out party games, unwrapping presents and putting

on new music.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 303

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

Not only is he full of himself, but also he’s insincere. I don’t know what she sees
him. I imagine, and hope, that they’ll break up soon.

2

I’ll have to see

getting the boiler repaired as it’s getting colder, and we can’t go

without the central heating in October.
3

I fell behind with a lot of coursework in my last year of university, but eventually I managed to see
it

. The thought of dropping out was horrifying, and it spurred me on.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — SEE Phrasal Verbs

87

4

Scrolling up, I noticed that the email asking for my bank account details was from a strange email
address. These phishing scams are pretty easy to see

, but also pretty easy to fall

for.
5

He’s convinced that she is head-over-heels in love with him. He needs to see
lies. He can’t see anything

6

I saw the guests

her

her pretty face.
at 8 o clock and saw them

at 11.

• Do you tend to see things through or give up at the first hurdle?
• What do you think your partner sees in you?
• Do you often see visitors out, or let them find their own way out?
• Do you have enough coffee to see you through until the end of the week?
• What kind of errands do you need to see to at the moment?

PLAY Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
play (up) to sth
play up to sb (suck up to sb, crawl up to sb, butter
sb up)

1) exploit a strength, make the most of sth
2) behave nicely to sb because you want them to
like you

play on sth
play on (carry on, go on) no object

1) exploit a weakness
2) continue playing

play around (muck around, mess around, get up
to) (similar to fool around in second meaning)

1) misbehave
2) have an affair (cheat on sb)

play along (with sb) (go along with sb)

1) accompany music

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — PLAY Phrasal Verbs

88

2) assume for argument’s sake that a dubious idea
is actually true
play away

1) play on opponents pitch
2) have an affair

play sth down (talk sth down, gloss over sth, make
light of sth, downplay) (opposite of play sth up)

understate, pretend sth is less important than it
really is

play sb off against sb

make 2 people compete, often to gain an
advantage

play out (pan out, turn out) no object

unfold, develop, happen

play up (no object)

1) misbehave (like play around)
2) machine stops working
3) body part aches
4) talk sth up

play sth up (opposites are talk sth down, play sth
down)
play sb for (same as take sb for, have sb pegged
as, have sb down as sb)

treat sb as sth

play (around) with sth (fiddle around with sth,
mess around with sth, tamper with sth)

change or touch something, perhaps causing
damage

play at being sb
what is he playing at?

1) pretend to be
2) used when you think sb is behaving in a stupid
way

Visual Phrasal Verbs

His teacher is constantly telling him off as he is
always playing up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — PLAY Phrasal Verbs

89

My back has been playing up since I tried to pick
up those heavy boxes.

We will need to play up to our strengths, but play
on our opponent’s weaknesses.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 303

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

My football team were scheduled to play

last Saturday, and we managed to see off our

opponents with a 3 – 0 win. We played

their lack of height, feeding the midfield and

attack with high balls. We also played

our main strength, which was our greater

stamina. Nonetheless, I’m not sure what the referee was playing

; firstly, he missed two

handballs in the penalty area. Secondly, I was clearly brought down unfairly by one of the opponents, but
the referee didn’t even pull out a yellow card. Still, we played

with the referee’s

decisions, and we were delighted with the final result. However, my leg has been playing
all week, so I’m going to see about arranging a doctor’s appointment tomorrow.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — PLAY Phrasal Verbs

90

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 303

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

The situation was incredibly hard to predict; no one could see beyond the next five minutes, so no
one knew how things would play

2

.

What the hell are you playing

? If you keep playing

with that

gun, it might go off by accident, seriously injuring or even killing someone.
3

I thought that he was talking absolute rubbish, so I was tempted to chime in with my own opinions,
but in the end I kept my mouth shut and played

with what he claimed. It seemed a

lot more fun this way.
4

My chess opponent was playing me

a fool, so I made a decisive move that alerted

him to the fact that he had already lost the game.
5

Several politicians have been playing

the government’s failure to reach its targets,

arguing that these targets were unrealistic in the first place.
6

Children will always attempt to play their father off

their mother; corruption

begins at a very early age.
7

She’s been playing

to the boss for at least a month. I think she is going to be

rewarded with a promotion.
8

Who’s been playing around

my laptop? Someone has fiddled around with it, so

all the settings are different.

• Have any of your devices been playing up?
• When you don't understand a joke, do you usually play along and laugh anyway?
• When you do sports, which strengths can you play up to?
• Which weaknesses do your opponents play on?
• How do you think the next election in your country will play out?
• When you were at school, did you used to play around in class? How?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — PLAY Phrasal Verbs

91

DRAW Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
draw on (intransitive) (similar to draw in)
draw on sth (draw upon sth, call on sth, call upon
sth, summon sth up)

1) when sth is approaching the end

draw back (from sth), pull back (from sth), step
back (from sth)

retreat, withdraw

draw away from sth, pull away from sth

go back from

draw sb together, pull sb together (similar to
gather together)

bring sth or sb together

draw sth/sb to sth/sb (draw sth towards)

Attract sth/sb to sth/sb

draw into sth, pull into sth

move into a space (usually a parking space or
lane)

draw out of sth, pull out of sth

move out of a space (usually a car), (pull out of
can mean withdraw from agreement or project)

draw sth off

remove liquid with a siphon

draw sb in (bring sb in, reel sb in)
draw in

1) attract people sw
2) night approaches, or nights get shorter (due to
season)
3) inhale

draw in (breath in)

2) make use of, have recourse to

draw sb into sth, drag sb into sth

make sb get involved in sth, but often when they
don’t want to

draw sth out, drag sth out (transitive of draw on)
draw sth out (similar bring sth out)
draw sb out

1) make sth last as long as possible

draw sth up
draw up (pull up)

1) make a list or plan
2) when your car approaches parks outside a
residence
3) when you take a chair

draw up, pull up (a chair)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DRAW Phrasal Verbs

2) extract
3) make sb less shy, or more able to talk

92

Visual Phrasal Verbs

As night was drawing in (or ‘drawing on’), the
festival-goers were drawn towards the main stage.

The meeting dragged on for an extra hour. (He
drew his presentation out for an hour longer than
necessary.)

Drawing on her wealth of experience, the
psychologist managed to draw the child out of her
shell.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 303

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

The sun had already gone down, the night was drawing
drawing

a list of suspects. Having drawn

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DRAW Phrasal Verbs

, and Detective O Connor was
a chair, he sat down and

93

started to narrow down the list by considering their alibis. Not one of the suspects had a watertight alibi,
so he could see that this case was likely to drag

for longer than expected. It seemed

likely that he would need to draw

all those precious skills he had picked up over the

years. Firstly, he needed to draw

a number of credible witnesses, and then he might be

able to drag the truth

of one of them.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 304

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

I wish my boss wouldn’t draw the meetings

for 1 hour. We could sort everything

out in 15 minutes if we wanted to.
2

The festival usually draws

about 50 000 people.

3

Is that your taxi? A car has just drawn

4

The proton is always drawn

5

Are you sure that he has calmed down? I don’t want to be drawn

outside.
the electron on account of its electric charge.
another

pointless argument.
6

He’s an incredibly shy teenager. I think he will open up if we draw him

of his

shell.
7

We need to draw

a rough draft of the plans, or else they will have no idea of the

schedule that we are working to.
8

Once you have drawn

the excess water, you will be left with the white precipitate

of silver bromide.

• When was the last time you were drawn into an argument?
• Do your meetings tend to draw on, or are they over quickly?
• Which local festivals draw in a big crowd?
• Have you drawn up a list of Christmas presents yet?
• Can you draw on extensive experience when you have a problem at work?
• What drew you and your partner together?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DRAW Phrasal Verbs

94

CALL Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
call on sth (draw on sth, make use of sth)
call on sb (to do sth)
call on sb (knock for sb)

1) summon or use sth (especially a quality you
have)
2) publicly demand
3) pay sb a visit

call sb out (similar to get sb round, call sb in)
call sb out on sth (similar to pick sb up on sth)
call out sth

1) call sb when you need urgent help

call sb in (call sb out)

1) call sb to your house when you need help
2) demand repayment of a loan or favour

2) draw attention to sb’s mistake or sb’s bad
behaviour
3) shout out sth

call in sth
call in on sb (compare call/drop/pop round,
drop/pop by)

pay sb a visit

call by, call round (no object)

pop by, drop by, drop round, pop over

call sb back

ring sb back

call for sth / sb

1) demand or require
2) be required or necessary
2) go sw to get sb

call for sb (compare knock for sb, pick sb up)
call sth forth (bring sth forth)
call forth sth

evoke or elicit, cause a reaction

call sth off

cancel

call sb up
call sth up (stir up, conjure up, bring sb back to)
call sth up (on a screen. Compare ‘pop up’)

1) summon for military service
2) evoke memories or feelings
3) make information appear on a computer screen

call at sw

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — CALL Phrasal Verbs

stop briefly (especially trains)

95

Visual Phrasal Verbs

While some are calling on Theresa May to put off
the Brexit deadline, others are calling for an
immediate withdrawal from the EU.

All trains calling at Pitsea, Laindon and Basildon
have been cancelled. The services have been
called off due to leaves on the track.

The smell of paint stirs up memories of my
childhood and calls forth emotions long forgotten.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 304

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

The smell of paint has always called

memories of childhood, and I put this down to the

fact that my parents would paint our fence every summer, so the whole garden reeked of the stuff.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — CALL Phrasal Verbs

96

Yesterday, my mother called in

me, wanting to call

a favour; she had

been looking after the kids most evenings, so I couldn’t turn her down. She told me that her fence was in
terrible condition, and the situation called

urgent action. I went straight over to her

house, grabbed the paint and brush from the shed, and applied myself in earnest. While I was finishing off
the last few panels, my mother went over all that I had done, calling me

on every spot

that I had missed.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 304

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

His behaviour was totally unacceptable, so a number of MPs have called

the

minister to step down.
2

The film is powerful and calls

a number of intense emotions in the audience, such

as anger and fear.
3

This train calls

a number of stations, including West Ham and Barking.

4

Call

5

Last night, she let us all in on a little secret: she’s pregnant! Such news obviously called

the main menu and click on ‘settings’.

a celebration, so I popped to the supermarket to buy some champagne.
6

The Prime Minister has called

the European Union to carefully consider the

stipulations laid out in the trade agreement.
7

The pitch was soaked through, so the referee had to call

8

The survivors of the crash had to call

the match.
all their strength to make it through the

harsh conditions of the freezing mountains. That they managed to hold out for so many weeks
demonstrates that courage must have won out over desperation.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — CALL Phrasal Verbs

97

• What would you like to call on the government to do?
• When was the last time someone called you out on your mistake?
• When was the last time you called someone out for home repairs?
• What was the last thing you had to call off?
• What kind of emotions were called forth when you went on your previous holiday?
• Do you know anyone who has been called up for military service?
• What measures do you think the current economic situation calls for?

HOLD Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
hold sth up
hold up (bear up, compare with get over and pull
through)
hold sb up
hold sth up
hold up one’s end of a deal / bargain
hold up (intransitive)

1) rob sth (a bank)
2) recover from illness or injury

hold sb back
hold sth back (keep sth from sb, hold out on sb,
not let on)
hold yourself back
hold sth back

1) hinder sb’s progress or success
2) keep information or an opinion secret

hold forth (drone on, go on, ramble on at sb about
sth)

talk at great length

hold sth in (similar to hold sth back)

restrain laughter or emotions

hold sth against sb

bear a grudge against sb

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — HOLD Phrasal Verbs

3) delay sb
4) hold sth aloft
5) stick to a deal
6) be corroborated or verified

3) hesitate to speak or act
4) hide or restrain thoughts or feelings

98

hold sb or sth off

delay sth or sb

hold sb to sth

demand that sb sticks to their promise

hold out on sb (hold sth back, keep sth from sb)

refuse to give information

hold out (no object. for + duration)
hold out for sth

1) survive for a period
2) wait until you get what you want or get
something better

hold sth out

1) extend a body part or object

hold sth down
hold sb down (pin sb down)
hold down a job

1) keep sth down
2) restrain sb physically
3) keep your job

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The evidence won’t hold up in court, so the
suspect might be set free.

He held out in the forest for months, living on
anything that nature provided him with.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — HOLD Phrasal Verbs

99

How is your brother holding up? I heard that he
fell off his motorbike, injuring his leg.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 304

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

The prosecution lawyer set forth the main reasons for doubting the veracity of the defendant’s assertions.
Firstly, his alibi didn’t hold

; several witnesses had seen him in the vicinity of the bank

close to the time of the robbery. Secondly, the defendant seemed to be holding something
when he was asked about the current whereabouts of his vehicle. It was certainly
suspicious that his vehicle had vanished on the same day that the robbers had held

the

bank. Lastly, the prosecution argued that the defendant was a man who had been unable to hold
a job for some time; therefore, he needed the money and had very little to lose. The
defence team had been holding

for an acquittal, but the prosecution won over the jury;

the defendant was sent down for 4 years.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 304

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

I heard that your brother got out of hospital last week. How is he holding

2

The onset of winter and the freezing cold temperatures held

?
the next stage of

construction for 3 months, but we hope to make up for lost time in the summer months.
3

I held

my arm for the bus, but the driver didn’t pull over; he just drove past me

without even looking at me.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — HOLD Phrasal Verbs

100

4

I had so much anger bottled up inside of me, but I had to hold myself

and smile at

the customer while I dealt with his complaint.
5

The teacher keeps on crossing out my correct answers and marking down my work; I think he must
hold something

6

me.

The match was about to start when the heavens opened, and it began to pelt down with rain. The
weather held

7

play for another 45 minutes.

I almost burst out laughing when he let me in on the rumour that had been going around.
Fortunately, I managed to hold it

, as I’m sure my laughter would have got on his

nerves.
8

We’ve been holding

our end of the bargain, and if you don’t hold

your end, we will simply call off the whole project.

• What is currently holding you back from achieving your goals?
• How long do you think you could hold out for if you were lost in the jungle?
• Are you the kind of person who always holds up his end of the bargain?
• Are you holding out for a high mark in your next exam?
• Do you find it easy to hold back your feelings and emotions?

LAY Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
lay hold of sth

obtain

lay sth by, lay sth aside, put sth by, put sth aside,
set sth by, set sth aside

1) save sth (money, time) for the future
2) put object to one side for future moment

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — LAY Phrasal Verbs

101

lay about (no object)

laze around

lay sth down

1) put sth down
2) specify rules, laws and guidelines
3) sacrifice your life

lay into sb

1) beat sb up
2) tell sb off
3) criticize (hit out at sb, lash out at sb)

lay sb off
lay off! / leave me alone! / cut it out!

make sb redundant
used when you want sb to stop annoying you

lay sth on

provide food for a special occasion

lay sth on the line

risk sth

lay sth out (the layout = the arrangement)
lay sth out (set sth out, set sth forth)
lay sb out

1) arrange (in order)
2) explain carefully, stipulate
3) knock sb out

a layover (stopover) (often used as a noun)

when you spend one night in another city in the
middle of a journey

be laid up

be forced to stay in bed

Visual Phrasal Verbs

He laid out all his tools on the table and set about
his work.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — LAY Phrasal Verbs

102

As soon as his opponent let down his guard, he
laid him out with a right hook. (also ‘knocked
him out’)

He laid out (set out) all the reasons why a new
approach was necessary, but he couldn’t win over
the boss.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 304

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Having graduated from university, I set out to find gainful employment; my parents had made it very
clear that I wouldn’t be laying

the house all day. They had laid

a

number of ground rules which I had to abide by while living under their roof. Luckily, a local firm took
me on as a copywriter, so I was able to lay some money

each month for the rent and a

little for myself. Eventually, I managed to save up enough to put down a deposit on my first flat. My
parents were happy to see I had landed on my feet, and even happier to see that I was moving out; in fact,
they laid

a feast to celebrate the fact that I had bought my first home.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — LAY Phrasal Verbs

103

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 305

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

He has been laid

in bed since he came down with flu a few days ago. He’ll be

over it tomorrow or the next day.
2

The newlyweds had laid

a huge buffet for the guests, so everyone was piling food

onto their plates and filling up their glasses in readiness for the toast.
3

We had a very short lay

in Geneva, but then we got back on the plane and took

off.
4

The newspaper laid

the footballer, pointing out that his marriage had broken

down because of his alcoholism.
5

The terms and conditions are laid

in the contract, so please go through this

document carefully.
6

He’ll be laying his job

the line if he doesn’t carry out the instructions of

management to the letter.
7

I have been trying to lay hold

an old book that I first read as a youngster, but

which has gone out of print.
8

The factory had to lay

another 50 employees, as several parts of the business are

being hived off.

• What kind of ground rules did your parents lay down when you were a youngster?
• Do you lay aside a little money every month for a rainy day?
• When was the last time you were laid up in bed? What kind of infection had you picked up?
• When was the last time you threw a party and laid on some food? Did you lay on any
entertainment?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — LAY Phrasal Verbs

104

BEAR Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
bear off sth (similar to veer off, skid off, go off)

take a turning from the main road that is only at a
slight angle

bear down (similar to buckle down and knuckle
down)

apply oneself earnestly

bear down on sb/sth (compare with close in on sb,
home in on sb, zero in on sb, gain on sb)

move towards sb in a threatening way

bear on sth (also have a bearing on sth, pertain to)

1) be connected or relevant to
2) influence or affect

bear sth out (similar to hold up, which is
intransitive)

corroborate or verify

bear up (hold up) (compare with get over sth and
man up)

recover from a difficult or painful situation

bear in mind

please remember

bear with sb

be patient with sb

bear witness/testimony to sth (testify to, attest to)

corroborate

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The evidence that they found bore out his alibi;
he has now been ruled out as a suspect.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BEAR Phrasal Verbs

105

The policeman was bearing down on us, so I had
no choice but to pull over.

He’s been laid up in bed since the operation, but
he’s bearing up.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 305

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Please, bear

me while I relate this story as I do tend to drone on, and bear
mind that these events happened a long time ago. The testimonies of my brothers and

sisters will bear

what I have said. During childhood, I was kicked out of school for

bunking off classes. I used to head down to the park at lunch time, and then not go back for the afternoon
classes. One day, while I was messing around in the park, I suddenly caught a glimpse of the headmaster
in the corner of my eye. He was bearing

on me so quickly that even running away was

not an option. I was swiftly given a good ticking off and then told that I shouldn’t bother coming into
school the next day.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BEAR Phrasal Verbs

106

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 305

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

There is compelling evidence that bears

his alibi. Perhaps he should be released

from custody.
2

While he was running across the main road, he was run over by a jeep. He is still bearing
in hospital, but doctors expect him to make a full recovery.

3

The police could find no evidence bearing

his disappearance. It was a most

perplexing mystery.
4

If you bear

at the next junction, you should come up to a roundabout. Turn off at

the third exit.
5

Bear

mind that the judge let him off with a suspended sentence the last time he

was in court. This time the judge will come down very heavily on the defendant.
6

Please bear

us for 5 minutes while we call up your details on our computer.

• When was the last time you came down with something? How long were you bearing up?
• Recently, have you been bearing down or slacking off at work?
• How much does our genetic heritage have a bearing on our own success?
• Do you think that the evidence bears out the claim that man’s actions are responsible for an
increase in global temperatures?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BEAR Phrasal Verbs

107

LET Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
let sb down
let sth down

disappoint sb
deflate or allow to descend

let up (no object)

when sth bad stops (e.g weather)

let up on sb or sth (go easy on sb)

when you stop being so severe or harsh with sb or
sth

let sb in on sth (compare with be in on sth, walk in
on sth, listen in on sth, barge in on sb, muscle in
on sth)

allow sb to know a secret

let on (no object) (compare with let sb in on)

reveal a secret

let sb out
let sth out
let sth out (similar to blurt sth out)

release sb
emit a sound
reveal a secret

let oneself in for (compare with be in for, come in
for)

become involved in unpleasant or difficult
situation.

let sth off (set sth off)
let sb off with sth (compare with get away with
sth)

1) detonate
2) allow sb not to be punished, or to be punished
leniently

Visual Phrasal Verbs

She didn’t know what she was letting herself in
for when she took that teaching position. Now she
knows that she’s not cut out for it.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — LET Phrasal Verbs

108

Both her mother and her grandmother ought to let
up on her. She can’t let out a sound without them
telling her off.

Finally, the rain has let up; the sun has come out;
and I can go for a refreshing stroll around the
park.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 305

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Last night was bonfire night, and we decided to have a party and let

some fireworks.

Unfortunately, it was chucking it down at 7:00 pm, so we held off for an hour. A couple of guests who
said they would come let us

as they never showed up; I think the bad weather put them

off. However, the rain let

at 8:00 pm, so we all went outside to watch the display. I had

only bothered buying rockets because I can’t stand the little fireworks that fizzle out in a few seconds, not
even letting

a large bang! Nonetheless, I didn’t know what I had let my guests
for when I bought these rockets. Without doubt, they were the loudest and brightest that

I had ever bought.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — LET Phrasal Verbs

109

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 305

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

The police have been interrogating the suspect for 3 hours, attempting to wring the truth out of him,
but he still hasn’t let

2

.

In the first year of his teaching career, he spent most of the working day shouting at the pupils,
coming down heavily on all forms of misbehaviour. This year he has let

on his

students, realising that a soft approach can be more productive than a severe one.
3

He was accused of having stolen thousands of pounds; therefore, he was expected to go down for a
number of years. However, the judge let him

4

with a suspended sentence.

The students had no idea what they were letting themselves in

when they

coughed up £30 for a new text book. However, when the new vocabulary started to sink in, they
realised that they hadn’t frittered away the money on nothing.
5

I asked the pupil to hand in the essay by the end of the week, but instead he just fobbed me off with
a lame excuse. I put off the deadline for a few more days, hoping that this would give him the
chance to finish off the coursework, but he still let me

6

She promised to let me

.

on her secret providing that I not blurt it out to any of my

brothers and sisters.

• Have you ever broken the law? Did the authorities come down heavily on you, or did they let you
off with a lenient punishment?
• Do you enjoy letting off fireworks at festivals or parties?
• When was the last time someone close let you down? How did the situation play out?
• Who do you let in on your secrets? Why do you confide in this person?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — LET Phrasal Verbs

110

WORK Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
work sth off (a debt, calories, weight)

reduce sth by doing work

work on sth

improve sth by working on it

work at sth (similar to keep at sth)

improve sth by constantly working at it

work together on sth

collaborate on sth

work out (similar to play out, pan out, go off,
come off)
work sth out

1) happen or develop in a specific way
2) do exercise in the gym
3) figure sth out (calculate)

work sth over (polish sth up)

improve the first draft of sth

work around sth (e.g a problem or difficulty)
a workaround = a way of overcoming a problem

avoid a problem by using an alternative option

work through sth

deal with sth gradually, step by step

work towards sth

make a gradual and constant effort to achieve a
goal

work sb into a frenzy/panic/state

make sb lose control of themselves by annoying
them

work sb up (get worked-up, be worked-up, similar
to wind sb up)
work sth up (work up the courage, work up the
appetite)

1) upset sb (worked-up means frustrated or upset)
2) increase sth (build sth up)

work up to sth

manage to reach a goal that you are working
towards by increasing the difficulty every time
you practice it.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WORK Phrasal Verbs

111

Visual Phrasal Verbs

After knocking off work, they drop by the gym to
work off a few calories.

He finally worked up the courage to go down on
one knee and pop the question.

He gets so worked up whenever he gets in a car;
he needs to chill out.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 305

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I was reading that several scientists are working

the creation of a radio-optical

telescope that will be located below sea level. They have already worked

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WORK Phrasal Verbs

exactly where

112

the site will be located, and local media have reported that scientists from all over the world will be
working

on the project. The telescope will be below sea level because the scientists are

trying to work

the problem of interference from the world’s oceans. It has even been

suggested that the cosmic microwave background radiation could actually be a signal emitted by the
Earth’s oceans, and if this is the case, we would expect the new telescope not to detect any such signal as
it is located below sea level. Such suggestions have worked theoretical physicists

a

frenzy, mainly because the detection of the cosmic background radiation was the main evidence for the
Big Bang. If the new telescope discovers that the cosmic background signal doesn’t appear below sea
level, it appears that science will have to develop a new theory for the beginning of the universe (if,
indeed, it even has a beginning).

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 306

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:
1

I was working

in the gym for 3 hours, and it really helped me to work
an appetite.

2

I spent 30 minutes on the exercise bike; I think I managed to work

a lot of

calories.
3

If you work

your pronunciation every day, singing songs and reciting poetry, it is

sure to gradually improve.
4

If you work

the exercise slowly, coming at each problem patiently, you are sure to

breeze through the test.
5

The minister’s comments were certainly politically incorrect, perhaps even verging on racist and
sexist. This is why the newspapers were worked

6

It is very difficult to do a somersault, but if you work

a frenzy.
to it on a trampoline,

starting with a forward roll, moving on to a jump and a roll, finishing with a jump, a roll and a
landing, you will manage to do it quite quickly.
7

He gets so worked-

whenever his brother winds him up; he needs to chill out and

spend more time with others.
8

He has been moaning about his job since he started, so I don’t think it’s working
well. I suppose he’ll pack it in soon.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WORK Phrasal Verbs

113

• Do you tend to work through tasks slowly or quickly?
• What kind of things get you worked up?
• How do you like to work up an appetite?
• Can you think of a time when you managed to work around a problem?
• How could your English be improved? What do you need to work at?

BE Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
be after sth
be after sb (come after sb, run after sb)

1) try to find sth or sb
2) chase sb

be along (no object) come along, show up, turn up

appear, arrive

be away (compare go away and run away)

be not at home, but somewhere far away

be out, be in

1) be outside or inside
2) be excluded or included

be cut out for

not be good or strong enough for something
general (like a profession)

be up to, feel up to (plus gerund)

1) not be good or strong enough for something
specific (like going into work)
2) do sth (what have you been up to?)
3) do sth naughty or suspicious

be up to sth
be up to sth
be down with sth (come down with sth, go down
with sth)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BE Phrasal Verbs

to be ill with sth (a disease or flu)

114

be down (get sb down, bring sb down)

be depressed

be in on sth (get in on sth, listen in on sth, let sb in
on sth, cash in on sth, walk in on sb)

be part of sth clandestine (a secret plan or plot)

be not on (no object)

be unacceptable (often morally unacceptable)

be into sth

be interested in (hobbies and sports)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The suspect looks very suspicious, and he was in
the vicinity of the shop at the time of the robbery.
I am sure he is in on it.

Most of the teeth on that saw have been worn
away. It’s definitely not up to the task at hand.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BE Phrasal Verbs

115

His behaviour was not on, so he was sent into the
corner to mull over what he had done.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 306

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Yesterday, my kids asked over some of their friends for a small party. Not all of their friends came,
however, as a couple of them were

with flu, so they didn’t feel

to

coming along. Nonetheless, 4 friends popped round, and when they arrived, they told me they were
some bicarbonate of soda and shaving cream as they were

making

‘slime’. I gave them what they wanted, even though I thought it was a strange request. After an hour or
so, I noticed that they were being incredibly quiet. Thinking that they must be
something, I went

to

to see what was going on. Opening the door, I couldn’t believe my

eyes: there was shaving foam all over the floor and baking soda all over the bed. I told them that the mess
was not

, so they would have to tidy it up immediately.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 306

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with an appropriate word:
1

I don’t think I am cut

for working in a classroom. I don’t like managing

children’s behaviour, and I don’t think I am good at it.
2

I don’t feel

to going in to work tomorrow. I’ll have to call in sick.

3

What’s wrong with Jake? He’s been

all week, and yesterday I walked in on him

when he was in tears.
4

I am

some AA batteries. Do you know where I could find some?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BE Phrasal Verbs

116

5

The police have been

him since last November, but they don’t seem to be able to

track him down.
6

Allegations of tax evasion have been levelled against several politicians, and it looks as though their
relatives have also been

on it.

• What sports were you into as a child?
• Are you cut out for the teaching profession?
• When was the last time you were down with flu?
• If you are after something in a shop, but can’t find it, do you ask the shop assistants for help?

Vocabulary
be on at sb about sth (go/drone/waffle/bang/rabbit
on at sb about sth)

nag or complain at sb about sth

be (well) up on sth

be well informed about sth

be onto sb

be aware of sb’s true, yet hidden, motives

be out of sth (run out of sth)

have nothing left of sth

be out to do sth

try hard to do sth

be or have (nothing/something) to do with

be (not) connected to sth

be up for sth

want sth, fancy sth, be in favour of sth

be in for sth (negative consequences)

can expect sth (negative) in result

be on (no object)

1) be switched on
2) be certain to go ahead (not cancelled)
3) be on drugs or alcohol or medicine

be on sth
be off (no object)
(call sth off is similar)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BE Phrasal Verbs

1) leave
2) food is spoilt
3) be cancelled
4) be switched off

117

Visual Phrasal Verbs

What a gorgeous day! Is anyone else up for a
beer? I’ve cooled them down in an ice bucket.

Our clients are always on at me about late
deliveries; I just brush off all their complaints.

I wasn’t well up on medieval poetry, so I
popped to the library to swot up on this topic.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 306

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I’m not well
particular, I’m

on modern history, but I do enjoy reading about ancient history. In
books that discuss the ancient megalithic structures, their purpose, and

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BE Phrasal Verbs

118

their construction. Some of the books claim that these ancient sites have nothing to do
the burial of the dead, as I was taught at school. Many researchers are

to prove their

own theories, of course, and some are rather sensible while others are far-fetched. The most persuasive
theory for me is the idea that many of these ancient sites were observatories for watching the stars. I
think those people who put forward such ideas are

something.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 306

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with an appropriate word:
1

My dad was always

at me about getting my hair cut. He couldn’t stand my long

hair.
2

Tonight’s football game is

due to heavy rain. If we played, we’d have to wade

through the water; the whole pitch is water-logged.
3

I forgot to put the milk back in the fridge, so when I tried drinking it this morning, it had already
gone

4

.

You’ll be

for a very difficult last year if you fail your summer exams. You might

even be forced to drop out of university.
5

We’re

6

I’m sure the new boss is

of sugar. Who is up for popping down the shops and buying some more?
to sack me. He keeps checking up on me while I’m

working, and I get the impression that he doesn’t like me. He is

a good reason to

let me go.

• Which products are you out of at the moment?
• What will you be in for if you fail your next test or exam?
• Which topics are you well up on?
• Do you think the problem of homelessness has something to do with poverty?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BE Phrasal Verbs

119

PHRASAL VERBS AND MOVEMENT

If you get a good grasp of the phrasal verbs that refer to movement, this will help you with a lot of other
phrasal verbs, so I have included a section only devoted to movement.

Vocabulary
go/walk/run/wander/drive etc...up to sth
go/walk/run/wander/drive etc…over to sth

approach sth

fall down sth (the stairs), fall over (intransitive),
fall off sth (a surface, a bike), fall out of (a tree),
trip over sth (a rock), trip sb up (make sb fall)

all of these words pertain to falling in various
ways.

bend over (sth), bend down, bow down,

lean forwards, bend forwards, bow

sit down, (opp. stand up) (similar to) lie down, get
down (opp. get up), drop down (opp. jump up),
kneel down

take a seat (sit)

run/go after sb (similar to) catch up with sb

run or go after sb means chase sb, catch up with
sb means reach after chasing sb

fall behind sb (with sth), lag behind, drop behind

move to a position nearer to the back. Could be in
a race, or metaphorical, such as ‘fall behind with
your studies, fall behind with your rent’

creep up on sb, sneak up on sb
(also catch up with sb, catch up on sb, if you do
notice the process happening)

1) quietly approach from behind
2) when a process happens to you without you
noticing

walk in on sb, barge in on sb, burst in on sb
(compare with be in on sth, muscle in on sth,
listen in on sb, let sb in on)

suddenly interrupt something private.

double up, double over, keel over

bend over because of a pain in the chest (or maybe
laughter with double over/up)

draw back (from sth), back away (from sth), move
back (from sth), back off

retreat physically

double back

return along the path from whence you came

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Phrasal Verbs and Movement

120

stand aside, step aside

allow sb to pass by moving to one side

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The thief sneaked up on her, fishing her phone
out of her back pocket like an expert.

Keeling (doubling) over in agony, I realised I
shouldn’t have gobbled up my lunch so quickly.

The cyclist in black had been lagging behind the
other cyclists for the first half of the race; then, he
crashed into a barrier and fell off his bike.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Phrasal Verbs and Movement

121

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 307

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Old age has a habit of creeping

on people. At first, you can’t even make out the small

grey hairs, but, in the end, your entire scalp is crawling with grey hair. You start to lag
others in terms of current affairs and modern gadgets. You find yourself doubling

to

places you have already been as you have forgotten something there. You notice you need to sit
more often after small amounts of exercise. And, if you don’t take these breaks, there’s
a risk you might be keeling

rather than falling

.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 307

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

When the President breezed into the room, we all

aside to allow him to

down at the head of the table.
2

The kidnapper must have

up on his victim, pinned him down on the floor, tied up

his arms, and then thrown him into the boot of his car.
3

The police had cordoned off the scene of the crime, and one of the police officers was ordering
passers-by to

4

away from the police cordon.

Our affair had been going on for months; we chose the meeting room for a passionate kiss, but the
boss suddenly

in on us and sacked us before we could even say a word in our

defence.
5

On hearing the punchline, I

over in fits of laughter. Never in my life had I heard

such a funny joke.
6

He is

behind the other students. He needs to buckle down, or he won’t get

through the rest of the course; he might even have to drop out and repeat the year.
7

Several policemen

after the armed robber, and when they caught up with him,

there was a shoot-out.
8

When the pregnant woman got on the train, I

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Phrasal Verbs and Movement

up and pointed at my seat.

122

Vocabulary
move up, move over, budge up, squash up

to move sideways (usually to give sb else space)

curl up, huddle up (compare cuddle up)

1) to wrap your arms around yourself and kneel
down (often to keep warm)

stretch out, reach out, stick out, spread out
(usually 2 limbs), hold out

extend (in various senses)

screw up (your face)
screw sth up
screw paper up

1) the face contorts in disgust
2) to make a mistake (informal)
3) roll paper into a ball

tense up

when the muscle stiffen

go on, carry on, push on, march on, soldier on,
press on

continue (push, march and soldier mean proceed
under difficult circumstances)

bowl along

walk quickly and energetically

hang back, hold back (compare with lag behind)

remain at the back on purpose. Perhaps you are
shy or fearful.

pile into sw, flood into sw, flow into sw, stream
into sw

enter in large numbers

go out, come in (tides)

the tide comes in and goes out.

go in, come out (sun, moon, stars)

disappear behind or appear from a cloud

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Her face screwed up in disgust as the whole room
reeked of rotten eggs.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Phrasal Verbs and Movement

123

Every day, the tide comes in twice and goes out
twice, and it has been suggested that one day we
could run our households on this power.

Suddenly, the whole sky clouded over and the
moon went in, creating a spooky atmosphere.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 307

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

My new cat likes to curl

on a pillow on the sofa, now that we are in the winter months.

For some reason, whenever I walk past her in the garden, she will always stretch

her

front legs, and I suppose it is a kind of greeting. If she is feeling particularly cheerful, she may even roll
over. However, most of the time she seems to be in a bad mood, so my son has named her ‘grumpy cat’.
If you try to stroke her, her muscles tense

; her face screws

lets out a hiss. She is happiest of all in the garden, especially when the sun has come

; and she
.

She may be grumpy, but we love her all the same.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Phrasal Verbs and Movement

124

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 307

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Be careful! The tide is

out; sometimes people are swept away by the strong

currents.
2

10 000 football supporters

into the stadium, singing songs and waving flags.

3

It clouded over for a few hours, but eventually the sun

out and we all popped

down the beach.
4

He

up the junk mail and threw it away, not wanting to find out what was in the

envelope.
5

I

out my arm, hoping that a passing car might pull over, but nobody wanted to

give me a lift.
6

She always takes up far too much space on the sofa, so I have to ask her to

up.

7

When I saw the dentist pick up her drill, all the muscles in my jaw

8

The next few months will be very difficult as demand is low at this time of year, but we will

up.

on and do our best.

Vocabulary
come up, go down (sun)

The sun rises and sets

freeze up

1) stop moving out of fear
2) engine stops working

storm out (of + object), storm in (to + object)
(compare storm off and breeze in)

leave (or enter) angrily (storm off = no object)

breeze in (into sw) (opposite of storm out of sw)

enter quickly and confidently

push or pull to (no object)

Push something (like a window) until it is almost
closed

throw at, throw to

throw at (throw and attack), throw to (friendly
game)

run at, come at, fly at

attack

flash by, fly by, dash by, whizz by

go past quickly (time flashes and flies by)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Phrasal Verbs and Movement

125

dash off, shoot off, run off, sprint off, take off, tear
off (similar to set off)

leave quickly

tag along (with sb)

accompany someone, though you aren’t needed

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I pushed the door to and threw on a jumper, as it
was starting to get chilly.

He threw his axe at the target. (But, we say, ‘he
threw the ball to me and I caught it’ if it is a
friendly game)

The attacker ran at his enemy, armed with a knife;
however, his opponent saw him coming and
quickly kicked the knife out of his hand.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Phrasal Verbs and Movement

126

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 307

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Last week, as soon as the sun came

, I flung on my sports kit and dashed

to play a game of rugby. Our opponents were top of the league, but we managed to see
them off by playing up to our superior stamina and speed. I play on the wing, so when the ball is thrown
me, I have to fly

the defenders, barging through their biggest players.

Our opponents were very unhappy to lose, and one of their players was even sent off for throwing the ball
the referee. The 90 minutes whizzed
so much. After the game, we all breezed

, as we were enjoying the game
the changing rooms, pleased with our

delightful result.

Exercise 6

Answers on p. 307

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I dashed down the corridor,

over the roller skate, and fell down the stairs, winding

up in hospital, where I remained for 3 days.
2

Jumping out of his chair, he

at the intruder in a rage, his face

up, his cheeks puffed out, and his eyes bulging out.
3

Having got the promotion that she wanted, she

into the office an hour after the

rest of us had piled in, and sat there grinning smugly.
4

Please, pull up a chair and

the window to if you are cold. You are going to brush

up on your phrasal verbs today.
5

The tide had

out; the Moon had

in; the noise of the party was

trailing off, and the sound of the crickets drowned all the other noises out.
6

The thought of someone slowly creeping up on him sent shivers down his spine;
up, he was unable to turn round and face his demons. So, he just remained there on his feet, staring
into space.

7

The apple was a few centimetres from my fingers, so I

out and pulled it off the

tree.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Phrasal Verbs and Movement

127

8

The children were running around and messing about; the time

by quickly for all

the kids, but for several adults the party really dragged on.

More Movement — Driving Phrasal Verbs

Vocabulary
pull up, draw up (sth)

arrive and stop. For example, you can pull up or
draw up outside someone’s house (in which case
you stop outside)
You can also pull up (or draw up) a chair, in which
case you move it in order to sit down

speed up, slow down (compare with ‘put your foot
down’ meaning speed up)

accelerate, decelerate

pull out (onto sth) / pull in (to sth)

Move into a faster (out) or slower (in) lane of
traffic

get in/out sth, get on/off sth

get in/out (cars) get on/off (public transport)

bump into sth, crash into sth

collide with sth

home in on sth, zero in on sth (similar to) close in
on sth, gain on sb (similar to) bear down on sb

home in on, zero in on (locked onto a target that
you are chasing) close in on, gain on (approach
target) bear down on (approach sb menacingly)

Flag sb down, (similar to) pull sb over

a policeman asks you to stop your vehicle, or you
can flag down a taxi. If you simply ‘pull over’ it
means stop the vehicle, and it is very similar to
draw up/pull up.

Pick sb up (similar to) drop sb off

pick sb up (collect sb to take them sw), drop sb off
(take sb to a destination and leave them there)

knock sb down, run sb over

hit sb while driving

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — More Movement — Driving Phrasal Verbs

128

pile up, build up, (compare ‘tail back + distance’)

increase (especially amount of traffic or number
of cars)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The missiles were zeroing in on their targets with
ruthless precision.

Traffic has been building up all day, and now the
M7 has a line of cars tailing back 5 km, starting at
junction 7.

A white car ran him over while he was walking
across the road last Tuesday.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — More Movement — Driving Phrasal Verbs

129

Exercise 7

Answers on p. 308

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

Traffic is now tailing

3 km on the M25 from junction 15, because a lorry crashed

another vehicle, spilling its cargo all over the motorway. Traffic is also building
on the M6; initial reports suggested that a pedestrian may have been run
. However, now there are conflicting reports that claim several police cars closed in
a car containing 3 criminals, eventually managing to force the driver to slow
and pull

in a lay-by. As soon as they got

of the car,

the 3 men were taken into police custody for questioning.

Exercise 8

Answers on p. 308

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

The road police

me down in the middle of the journey, so I had to get out and

show them my driving license. I also had to breathe into a breathalyser.
2

I

up a chair and sat down, spreading out my legs and stretching out my arms.

3

I asked my dad whether he would mind

me up at 18:00. I was worried that if he

turned up any later, he might not drop me off in time for my flight.
4

A young child was

down at the traffic lights yesterday. I think they should lower

the speed limit on that road.
5

My mother waved good bye to me as I

on the plane. Then, I dozed off as soon as

I sat down.
6

We ran away from the scene of the crime, but a policeman ran after us; within a few minutes, he
was already

down on us.

Vocabulary
skid off (dangerous), veer off, bear off

move off the main road (at a slight angle, rather
than 90 degrees)

rev up

increase speed or rate, enliven, stimulate

run (be) out of sth, fill up with sth (petrol)

run out of (not have any), refuel

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — More Movement — Driving Phrasal Verbs

130

step on sth (brake, accelerator)

put foot on brake or accelerator. ‘Put your foot
down!’ (speed up, usually, but ‘put your foot
down’ also means insist)

back up (similar to) back into

reverse, reverse into

block sb in (no object)

park so that another car doesn’t have enough
space to get out.

Put a car into (a gear), move up or down (a gear)

change gear

coast along (usually no object)

move forwards without putting your foot on the
accelerator (perhaps because of momentum or
because you are going downhill) or do the
minimum amount necessary

turn round (no object)

face opposite direction

turn over (similar to roll over, flip over)

when an object is upside down, or an animal is on
it’s back

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The baby learns to roll over long before he learns
to stand up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — More Movement — Driving Phrasal Verbs

131

The owl turned round when he heard us traipsing
through the forest.

She backed into the parking space, got out of the
car, and popped into the shops. When she came
back, she saw that someone had blocked her in.

Exercise 9

Answers on p. 308

➔ Fill in the gaps with the correct preposition:

I had a nightmare journey yesterday; firstly, I decided to pop

the supermarket to stock

up on food for the kids’ party. However, when I got out of the supermarket, I saw that another driver had
blocked me

. I tried to reverse my car through a small gap as I was in a hurry, but I

managed to accidentally back the car

a post. Having damaged my car, I ran

of petrol on the way back home, so I was forced to double
can of petrol from the supermarket. Once I had finally filled
into first gear and then the engine froze

and buy a
with petrol, I put the car

. In the end, I had to call out the vehicle repair

service.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — More Movement — Driving Phrasal Verbs

132

Exercise 10

Answers on p. 308

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I

out onto the motorway. A black Mercedes overtook me,

me

up as it pulled into my lane. The Mercedes sped away, but I went after him; when I was
in on him, a policeman
2

me over and gave me a speeding fine.

Please, slow down! It’s raining, so you might

off the road and crash into the

barrier.
3

up on the ring-road for the last few hours, and now the cars are

Traffic has been

back to the intersection.
4

Driving out to the countryside would have been impossible had I not first

the car

up with petrol; however, I still had to jump start the car the next morning when the engine
up.
5

I was almost out of water, so I

into a car park, got out of the car, and dashed to a

shop to buy some. The shop was teeming with kids on a school trip, and by the time I got back to
my car, some idiot had
6

While

me in.
into his drive, he

over his neighbours dog. Sadly, the

animal was in so much pain that it had to be put down.
7

At the next junction you need to

off this road, go round the next roundabout, and

take the third exit.
8

Having put the car into reverse, he

up several metres and

down

a cyclist.

UP Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘up’ tend to signify one of the following: upwards
movement (get up, stand up), increase (build sth up, go up), improvement (brush up on sth, swot up on
sth), completion (wrap up, lock up), or even the creation of something new (set sth up, start sth up).

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

133

Vocabulary
go up (compare with shoot up)

increase

get up, stand up

raise yourself off the ground

move up, budge up, squash up, shove up (similar
to move over, shove over)

A small movement in a sideways direction

do sth up (similar to button sth up, zip sth up, tie
sth up, wrap sth up)

1) fasten
2) renovate

walk/run/drive/go/come up to sb/sth (...and over
to)

approach

catch up (with sb)

1) manage to reach someone you are chasing
2) find out news from an old friend

keep up (with sb)

1) remain at the same level as someone else
2) understand sb

beef up sth

strengthen

swot up on sth, read up on sth, brush up on sth

revise and repeat knowledge to improve your
understanding

cheer (sb) up, perk (sb) up

become happier

save sth up (set aside/by, put aside/by)

put money in a safe place for a future moment

dress up (similar to spruce up, doll up, do up)

dress nicely for a special occasion

sex sth up (similar to jazz sth up, spice sth up)

make something sexier or more interesting,
exaggerate

run up (a bill)

spend a lot so that your bill gets bigger

cough up (compare with pay out and fork out)

reluctantly pay

weigh sth up

carefully consider pros and cons of sth

chase sb or sth up (follow sb up on sth)

1) find out how someone is progressing with a
task
2) find out whether a task is being done

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

134

Visual Phrasal Verbs

We ran up a huge bill at the restaurant, but I had a
great time catching up with old friends.

We are thinking about heading to Holland this
summer, but we are still weighing up the pros and
cons of going by plane or going by ferry.

‘Move up! You take up all the space and then
keep me up each night with your snoring.’

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 308

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

For the Christmas party, our boss booked a table for 20 at a nearby Thai restaurant. I decided to
up for the event, hoping to make a good impression on some of my colleagues. The

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

135

boss

me up at 7:00 as my house was on his way. He reeked of aftershave and was all
up. It took about 20 minutes for the staff to bring out all the food as we had ordered

so many dishes; nevertheless, the meal was delicious so we managed to
We must have

everything up.

up a huge bill, but it didn’t matter as the company had laid on all the

food and drink, so we didn’t have to

up a penny.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 308

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

The price of oil has been

up over the last few days, but it is expected to level out

by the end of the week.
2

It was a big party, so she

herself up, putting on her best evening dress and high-

heeled shoes.
3

The military is

up its presence on the eastern borders, with 5000 extra troops

flooding into the area in the next few weeks.
4

You’re

up all the space on this sofa.

up and let someone else sit

down.
5

I’ve been

up for weeks, and finally I have enough money to splash out on a new

bike.
6

In my first year of university, I chilled out too much. By the second year I couldn’t
up with the other students on my course, and I dropped out at the end of that year.

7

We’re

up the flat next week; we’ll be ripping out the old floor and putting in a

new one.
8

If I don’t

up another £100, the local council will be taking me to court.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

136

• On what occasions do you spruce or doll yourself up?
• Are you saving up for anything special at the moment?
• Do you think the government should beef up the military?
• If you are feeling down, what sort of things perk you up?
• Do you usually run up a large bill when you eat out?

Vocabulary
use sth up (similar to run out of sth)

utilize something completely until it is finished

give sth up
give up (no object)

1) stop a bad habit
2) surrender

drink sth up (similar to eat up)

consume sth until it is finished

book sth up

reserve sth (a holiday)

end up in sth, wind up in sth, land up in sth, finish
up in sth

finish up in a particular situation (often a
predicament)

wrap up sth (with sth)

1) completely cover 2) finish or end sth with sth

lock up sth

completely lock

stock up on sth (compare with squirrel sth away)

buy a large amount of sth for the future

tidy (sth) up, clean (sth) up, clear up (similar to
put sth away)

tidy or clean a room

mop sth up

1) clean floor with a mop
2) finish sth by completing last few details

set sth up
set sb up

1) start a business
2) frame someone (set sb up, pin the blame on sb)
3) install equipment so it is ready
4) arrange a romantic evening for two friends

set sth up (compare put sth up)
set sb up
take sth up

1) start a hobby
2) fill or occupy space or time

come up with sth, think sth up

have an idea, plan or suggestion

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

137

bring sb up
bring sth up

1) look after a child until he or she becomes an
adult
2) mention

turn up, show up, roll up (no object)

arrive (roll up means arrive late or unexpected)

come up, crop up (no object)

arise, appear

beat sb up

hit sb many times, attack and injure

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The speaker suggested that we wrap up the
discussion with some questions. I brought up
funding for the project, asking whether the budget
had been taken into account.

We just need to mop up a few more details with
our accountant, and then we can set up the new
business.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

138

She rolled up late for work again. The boss had a
go at her on the way in, and if she carries on like
this, he might get rid of her.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 308

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

The teacher told us that we would be
to

up the lesson with a little test, but we would have

up the questions ourselves. Each pupil had to think of a phrasal verb, while the other

students

up with yes and no questions to work out which verb it was. No one was able

to guess my phrasal verb, so my classmates

up in the end. My phrasal verb was ‘

up’ which has two meanings: mention something and look after someone until they are
an adult. Lots of different verbs

up in the lesson, so I think this is a good way to go

back over old material, learning it all by heart.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 309

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I hate it when my brother

all the toilet roll up without putting out a new one for

other members of the family.
2

He has a reputation for always

up late. He’ll probably be along if we hang around

for a few more minutes.
3

If we don’t

up the trip soon, we’ll have to fork out a lot more. And if we all go in

on a taxi, that will also help bring down the price.
4

I’m thinking of

up badminton; it’s an inexpensive way to keep in shape, and I

have a few friends that I can pit myself against.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

139

5

2 muggers set on him while he was walking back, and they
he

6

him up so badly that

up in hospital. I’ll drop by his ward tomorrow to

If you didn’t like the proposed date, why didn’t you

him up.
this up at the meeting? It’s

far too late to bring the date forward or put the date back.
7

The police have been trying to pin the blame on my uncle, so they

him up by

planting evidence in his car.
8

I leafed through the text last night, and I thought that it was a good piece of work, although spelling
mistakes did

up in a few places.

• Do you usually book up your holiday months in advance or at the last minute?
• Is it better to bring children up in the city or in the countryside?
• If you had the time and the money, what kind of business would you like to set up?
• What takes up most of the space in your lounge?
• When was the last time you landed up in a predicament?

Vocabulary
put sb up

accommodate sb

put up with sth

tolerate

look up to sb (opposite of look down on sb)

admire and respect

grass sb up (similar to) turn sb in, turn sb over to
the authorities, dob sb in

inform on sb

dry up (no object)

when the source of a flow stops (e.g a river dries
up, funding dries up)

open up (to sb)
open up (no object)

1) start being honest about your true motives or
feelings
2) new opportunities arise/appear

shake sth up
shake sb up

1) make important changes
2) emotionally upset or frighten

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

140

beat sb up (similar to do sb over)

hit someone many times in a fight

line up

arrange sth or sb into a line or queue

clutter sth up

objects fill a place in an untidy way

clog sth up

block the flow of sth

pile (sth) up (build up)

increase (or when a pile gets bigger)

shoot up
shoot sth (a drug) up

1) increase rapidly
2) inject (narcotics)

add up (no object)

1) make sense
2) accumulate (similar to build up)
3) add together (opposite of ‘take away’)

add up to sth

1) be equal to
2) when many factors combine to produce
particular result

clean up after sb, pick up after sb, (compare with
run around after sb and fuss over sb)

spoil sb by cleaning up their mess

pick sth/sb up

pick sb up on (call sb out on)

1) take something from a surface.
2) give sb a lift
3) learn a new language
4) point out sb’s mistakes

mess sth up, muck sth up,

1) make sth dirty, untidy. spoil 2) fail or do badly

churn sth up

damage surface of ground by walking or driving

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Whenever her kids clutter up the lounge with
their toys, she is always picking (cleaning) up
after her them. She should make them tidy up
their own mess.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

141

A tractor often comes through this part of the
field, churning up all the grass. Put on your
Wellington boots before you trudge through the
mud.

We called out the plumber because bits of food
had clogged up the pipe under the sink.

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 309

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

I have always

up to my older brother; he sailed through all his exams, and then he was

taken on by a prestigious company. In contrast, I
hold down a job either. He never

up all my exams, and I wasn’t able to
me up on my mistakes, perhaps as he didn’t want to

me up. Instead, he had always

up with my behaviour without

complaint, not even going on at our mum and dad when I was clearly living off their generosity.
Eventually, my parents funding, as well as their sympathy,

up; therefore, I had no

choice but to find gainful employment. Fortunately, an interesting job opportunity

up,

and I was able to turn my life around.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

142

Exercise 6

Answers on p. 309

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I don’t mind

my nephew up, but whenever he stays he

up the

toilet with paper.
2

Funding for this project will soon

up, so it’s important to reel in some new

investors.
3

His room is always

up with clothes. Why doesn’t he put them away instead of

just throwing them on the floor?
4

Work started
need to

5

The accident really

6

His wife

up a few weeks ago, and I have been snowed under ever since. I
up a holiday and chill out for a few weeks.
him up; he says he won’t get back on a motorbike ever again.
him up; she turned him over to the authorities when she found out that

he’d been cheating on her.
7

So far, the results of the experiment don’t seem to

up: on the one hand, they show

that light is a particle, but on the other hand, they show that it’s a wave.
8

The class

up in the playground when the fire alarm went off.

• Which famous people do you look up to?
• Which objects clutter up your home? Do you have a place to hide away old junk?
• Do you know any parents that run around after their children?
• If a relative asked to stay, would you put them up for a night?
• If the supply of oil dries up, what will the human race use instead?
• Did you mess up any of your exams?

Vocabulary
spring up, sprout up (similar to crop up and turn
up)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

suddenly appear (especially buildings, flowers and
trees)

143

summon sth up, call sth up, stir sth up, conjure sth
up

bring back memories

flare up (break out)

violence, disease and war breaks out

smash sth up, break sth up

smash into many pieces (compare with cut up)

stand up for sb, stick up for sb

speak or act in support of sb

gang up on sb

pick on sb as a group

break up
break sth/sb up

1) people end their relationship
2) prevent a fight

back sth/sb up

1) support sb
2) make a copy of sth

prop sth up, shore sth up, buoy sth up

physically support a structure (but often used
metaphorically for ‘financially support’)

put sb up to sth

provoke sb to do sth naughty or mischievous

get up to sth, be up to sth

do sth mischievous

show sb up
show up (no object)

1) embarrass or humiliate sb
2) turn up (arrive, appear)

sell/buy sth up

buy or sell all of sth

dish sth up

lay food out on the table

be well up on sth

be well informed about sth

wind sb up

annoy or irritate

square up with sb, settle up with sb (settle up)
square sth (up) with sth

1) pay off a debt to sb (pay it completely)
2) match sth with sth, or understand how sth
agrees with sth

square up to sb

when a person squares his shoulders to sb to show
he is ready for a fight

well up, mist over

when eyes well up or mist over, the person is on
the verge of bursting into tears

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

144

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Violence has flared up in the capital once again.
World leaders are calling for a ceasefire, but it
may be a while before opposing groups come to
the negotiating table.

Banks are calling for a new round of quantitative
easing, arguing that such a precaution would prop
up (shore up, buoy up) the economy.

I could hear that the kids were getting up to
something; when I went upstairs to tell them off, I
could see they were only messing around, so I let
them carry on.

Exercise 7

Answers on p. 309

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Seeing her face one more time
classmates had surrounded her and were

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

up memories of the first time we had met: a group of
her up. It looked as though a fight were about

145

to

up. I was outraged at what they

up to, so I tried to

up for the poor girl by getting among them and

up to the biggest

bully. I managed to

them up before any punches were thrown, and the bullies headed

off home. She has

up to me as if I were her older brother ever since that moment.

Exercise 8

Answers on p. 309

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I took my kids out to a restaurant, and they behaved terribly,

me up in front of all

my friends.
2

I think the teacher is excellent at maintaining discipline; however, he

not very

well up on his subject.
3

Please, go into the dining room and lay out all the knives and forks. I will be

up

your food in ten minutes.
4

The little boy owned up to throwing the piece of paper at the teacher, but he made out that his
schoolmate had

5

I haven’t

him up to it.
up any of this work for a long time, so I’d better sort it out tonight,

otherwise I might lose the whole lot.
6

Have you seen all the new shops which are

up on the high street? We’ll have to

visit them this weekend and look around.
7

Peter loves

up his brother until he breaks down in tears. And his parents just let

him get away with it, letting him off rather than telling him off. It gets on my nerves!
8

We are going to

up and move out once we have found a nice overseas property.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

146

• Have any buildings sprouted up in your town recently?
• Which subjects would you say you were well up on?
• Which things stir up memories of your childhood?
• Where do you think the next conflict will flare up?
• Do you think the economy needs shoring up at the moment? Which fiscal measures need to be
brought in?

Vocabulary
butter sb up, crawl up to sb, suck up to sb, play up
to sb

flatter or praise to gain advantage

own up to sth

admit

work up sth (a sweat, a thirst, an appetite)
work sb up (similar to work yourself into a frenzy
or state)

1) increase your appetite or sweat by working
2) to make sb worried, anxious or upset
(especially yourself)

play up (no object)

1) machine stoops working
2) body part starts to hurt or ache
3) misbehave (compare be up to sth, get up to sth)

bear up (similar to hold up)

recover from an injury

size sb or sth up

judge or estimate sth, judge sb’s character

make sth up (a story)

lie or invent

be made up of sth

consist of

draw up, pull up

1) stop a vehicle
2) pull up a seat (take a seat)
3) make a provisional list or plan

draw sth up (make sth up)
call sb/sth up

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

1) make sb do military service
2) call sb
3) make information appear on a screen

147

hold sth up
hold up (bear up, compare with get over)
hold sb up
hold sth up
hold up one’s end of a deal / bargain
hold up (intransitive)

1) rob a bank
2) be healthy and strong after illness or injury
3) delay sb
4) hold sth aloft
5) stick to a deal
6) corroborate or verify

lay sb up

force sb to stay in bed

let up

when sth bad stops (e.g weather)

man up! (often used in imperative)

be braver or stronger

let up on sb or sth (go easy on sb)

when you stop being so severe or harsh with sb or
sth

be holed up (barricade sb in, hide away)

hide in a secret and well-protected location

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Holed up in our military bunker, we had to get by
on stale food and dirty water.

The beautiful hairdresser pulled up a chair and
invited me to sit down.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

148

Someone has been fiddling around with my
computer, and now it’s playing up. I reckon my
son might have something to do with it, but he
won’t own up to it.

Exercise 9

Answers on p. 309

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

My class is

up of 30 pupils, and the majority of us are well behaved. However, there is

one boy, Simon, who regularly

up,

up different teachers and

up late for most lessons. He gets on everyone’s nerves; his behaviour drags out the
lesson, puts off the teacher, and holds back the whole class. Yesterday, my mobile phone went missing at
break time, and I was told that Simon had been fiddling around with my bag. Boiling over with anger, I
confronted him, but he wouldn’t

up to rummaging through my belongings. Changing

my strategy, I decided to rifle through his bag while he wasn’t in the room. Unsurprisingly, I fished my
phone out straight away.

Exercise 10

Answers on p. 309

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I get on with most of my classmates, but there are a few pupils who I can’t stand because they are
always

up to the teacher.

2

Most of the evidence was circumstantial, being unlikely to

3

You ought to

up in a court of law.

up on your son. If you were less harsh, he would start to learn from

his own mistakes and acquire a sense of responsibility.
4

The rain has been coming down all day, so now I’m soaked through. When do you think it will
up?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — UP Phrasal Verbs

149

5

If you

6

My back has been

up the main menu, you’ll be able to find the settings icon.
up ever since I tried to carry that heavy suitcase down those

stairs.
7

Before breakfast, I like to

up an appetite by going for a 10km run.

8

He came down with a nasty infection, and the doctor says he will be

up for the

rest of the week.

• How do you like to work up an appetite?
• Have you ever been held up at an airport?
• When was the last time you were laid up in bed?
• Do you know anyone who has been called up for military service?
• Has any part of your body been playing up recently?

DOWN Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘down’ tend to signify one of the following: downwards
movement (trickle down, kneel down), decrease (cut down on sth, go down), depression or rejection (let
sb down, get sb down), restriction (clamp down on sth, come down on sth), or ascribing causes (put sth
down to sth, come down to sth).

Vocabulary
sit down

take a seat

kneel down

get on your knees

get down

move your body closer to the floor

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

150

go down
go down (in history) for sth and as sb

1) decrease 2) happen 3) fall 4) go to prison (go
down for + duration) 4) be long remembered for
sth and as sb

stand/step down (compare with the less formal
pack sth in, jack sth in)

resign

settle down (calm down)

1) become comfortable in a new place or decide to
stay in a new place for a long time
2) calm down

trickle down sth, run down sth

when water (tears, raindrops) moves down sth

cut down on sth

reduce bad habits (reduce cigarettes, chocolate)

quieten down (also pipe down)

people become less noisy

calm down (simmer down)

become peaceful or relaxed

slow down

opposite of speed up

cool down

opposite of warm up

dumb sth or sb down (compare with water sth
down)

make something or someone easier, simpler, or
more stupid

die down

noise or commotion gets quieter

come down with sth

when someone contracts a disease or illness

wear sb down

(mentally) exhaust

run-down (adjective)

weak, in bad condition, tired, unhealthy (used for
people, buildings and parts of town)

beat down (rain and sun)

rain or sun beats down on you when it is intense

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

151

Visual Phrasal Verbs

By 2:00 am, the party had started to die down,
and those of us that were still up drank to the
health of the birthday girl.

Last year, we moved into a new house in a
different part of town. It took a while to get used
to the new area, but eventually we settled down.

The proportion of kids breezing through their
exams is increasing every year, but cynics say
that the exams have been dumbed down.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 310

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

As soon as we had saved up enough money, we decided to move into a new house. The area where we
lived was urban and

-down, but we wanted to

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

down in a rural area

152

with plenty of space for the kids to run around. It was incredibly difficult to get all of our stuff to the new
place. We were stressed out and
helped me to

down by the end of it. But it was worth it. The fresh air
down on a number of bad habits. And being far away from the hustle and

bustle of the city, the pace of life seemed to

down.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 310

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

He

down in front of me and begged for forgiveness.

2

These exams have been

down so that everyone sails through the test, and the

good marks reflect well on the teachers.
3

I hope the weather

down a bit. I find this stifling heat unbearable. I work up a

sweat just sitting in my chair.
4

It was

down with rain, and the raindrops were

down the

window.
5

When information came to light regarding the minister’s involvement in tax avoidance schemes,
even his closest allies called for him to

6

down.

Every time time you get in a car, you

your foot down. If you don’t slow down,

you’re going to run someone over.
7

The roar of the applause

down, and the performer bent forwards to take one last

bow.
8

Shhh! This is a library; if you don’t

down, you’ll be thrown out.

• Which areas are there in your city or town which are rather run-down?
• Do you think education is being dumbed down?
• What kind of things should you cut down on?
• Under what circumstances would you step down?
• Do you think you could settle down in another country? Which country would you move to?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

153

Vocabulary
put sb down
put sth down

1) insult
2) opposite of pick up 3) kill an animal out of
mercy 4) write sth down

bring sb or sth down (get sb down in first sense)

1) depress 2) topple the government or authorities

get down (no object)
get sb down (bring sb down)

1) move body closer to the floor
2) depress sb

let sb/sth down

1) disappoint 2) deflate (a tyre) opposite of pump
up

turn sb/sth down

refuse an offer or refuse someone’s offer

look down on sb (opposite of look up to)

disrespect

break down (no object)

1) when a car stops working 2) when a person
can’t cope with difficult events in their life

shut sth down

permanently close sth (e.g a business)

come/crack/clamp down on sth

When the authorities take a harsher approach to
certain crimes

pin sb or sth down, (similar to hold sb down)

1) keep someone held against the floor
2) fully elucidate someone’s opinion
3) fully elucidate the cause of something

track sb down, hunt sb down

attempt to find sb

narrow sth down

reduce number of possibilities (e.g suspects)

wind down (no object)
wind sth down

1) finish gradually
2) shut down a business gradually

write sth down, note sth down, jot sth down, put
sth down, copy sth down

make a note of something important

come down to sth, put sth down to (compare with
boil down to sth, hinge on sth)

ascribe a cause to something

hand sth down

1) one generation passes sth to another generation
2) older sibling passes sth to younger siblings 3) a
judge hands down a sentence

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

154

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Inflation comes down to interest rates. (I put
inflation down to the interest rates that are
decided by central banks.) (It is difficult to pin
down the cause of inflation.)

Unable to scrape by any longer, we are winding
down the business. We will have completely shut
down by the end of the month.

Police have been cracking down on the
lawlessness in the city centre; several rioters were
pinned down, carried away, and are now locked
up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

155

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 310

➔ Fill successful the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Unfortunately, it looks as though our suppliers have

us down again. They promised to

deliver the goods last week, but then they fobbed us off at the last minute with a lame excuse: they
claimed their driver had

down with a nasty infection. However, I am certain that they

have drivers standing by that are ready to fill in for anyone that might fall ill. In my opinion, their
tardiness
others

down to a lack of organizational skills among the management. Nonetheless,
it down to machinery

down at the factory.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 310

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Sherlock discovered evidence at the crime scene that enabled him to

down the list

of potential suspects.
2

I always keep a notepad handy as I like to

down any new ideas that I might come

up with.
3

Engineers are trying to

down the cause of the power outage.

4

The authorities ought to

down on the big businesses that are guilty of tax evasion.

Amazon, Facebook, and Google seem to get away with paying barely any tax.
5

I’ve been looking into my family tree recently, so I’m trying to

down several

distant relatives who may be able help me.
6

Even if they offer me the job, I reckon I’ll

them down.

7

The government subsidies that were shoring up the industry have now been withdrawn, and it seems
likely that several businesses will be permanently

8

The former government was

down.

down 6 months ago in a series of violent uprisings

that left hundreds dead.
9

The sentence

down by the judge was so lenient; many journalists wrote that the

offender had virtually been exonerated.
10

He has a brother who is slightly older than he is, so we often

down the clothes,

saving a lot of money in the process.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

156

• What do you put your success down to?
• What kind of things should the authorities clamp down on?
• Have you ever turned down a job offer? Why?
• Have you ever broken down on a long journey?
• Did you receive clothes that were handed down to you from older siblings?

Vocabulary
pour down, come down, tip down, chuck it down

rain heavily

water sth down (compare with dumb sth down)

1) make sth less offensive or powerful or detailed
2) dilute

back down (on/from sth) (compare with back out
of sth, pull out of sth)

1) stop asking for sth 2) stop insisting you will do
sth

burn sth down

when a building is reduced to ashes by fire

hold sth down (a job)

keep a job

keep sth down

control or suppress, usually the noise

play sth down (talk sth down)

under-exaggerate. Make sth seem less important

shoot sth down

make sth hit the ground by shooting it

simmer down (no object) (calm down)

become less excited, angry, or violent

boil down to sth (similar to hinge on sth, come
down to sth)

be the main reason for sth

climb down (no object)

reverse your position and admit that your previous
opinion was mistaken

scroll down sth

move down an internet page or computer
document

knock sth down
knock down sth
knock sb down on sth (e.g the price)

1) destroy sth that stands (e.g a building)
2) make the price cheaper
3) get a cheaper price from sb

put sb down for sth

put sb’s name on a list for sth

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

157

go down (well or badly) (compare with come off)

be enjoyed (or not) by the audience, guests, or
public

go down (in history) for sth as sth/sb
be renowned for sth as sth/sb
knuckle down, buckle down (compare with slog
away, beaver away, slave away)

start working hard

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The new legislation, which was going to be rolled
out next month, has not gone down well. Several
protests outside the White House have forced the
government to back down.

Several houses caught up in the blaze burnt
down; firefighters struggled to put out the inferno
for several hours.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

158

Most of the public anger boils down to the
spending cuts that were brought in last month.
Protesters hope to force the government to climb
down on these austere measures.

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 310

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

It had been

down all day. With rain

down the windowpane, I was

thumbing through the newspaper, my eyes darting from one article to the next. The headline that caught
my eye was ‘government accused of

down new trade agreement’. The article explained

that MPs had originally set out to collect higher import taxes on goods arriving from outside the EU, but
pressure from business meant that Westminster had to

down so that the rate of tax

remains largely unchanged. A number of politicians attempted to
the agreement, pointing out that the agreement would still

down the changes in
down in history as a turning

point in international relations.

Exercise 6

Answers on p. 310

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:

down the webpage, I noticed several glaring errors that would have to be

1

corrected.
2

If we don’t

down soon, we’re going to miss the deadline; we’ll be slaving away

on both projects next week.
3

The battle

4

The council has refused to

down in history as the largest tank battle since World War Two.
down on their plans to turn parts of the forest into

residential housing.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — DOWN Phrasal Verbs

159

5

Success

down to effort rather than luck.

6

Once the children had

7

I had to haggle with the taxi driver, and he

down, the teacher handed out the worksheets.
down the price. In the end, everyone

had to chip in 10 euros, so it wasn’t too expensive.
8

If you’re going to get a take-away,

me down for a quarter pounder and chips.

• How long have you held down your job?
• What’s the weather like today? Is it pouring down again, or has the sun come out?
• Do you back down quickly when you are under pressure?
• Are exams getting watered down each year?
What events from the last 5 years will go down in history, and why?

IN Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘in’ tend to signify one of the following: inclusion (cut sb in,
join in, rope sb in), direction (go in, pop in, breathe in), sharing (pitch in, chip in, go in on), introducing
sth new (bring in, usher in, reel in), and interruption (butt in, barge in, cut in on sb, chime in).

Vocabulary

plug sth in (opposite = unplug)

electrically connect

breathe (sth) in (opposite = breathe out)

take air into the lungs

colour sth in

fill with colour

fill sth in (same as fill sth out!)
fill in for sb (cover for sb)

1) complete a form
2) do someone else’s job as they are
unavailable

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

160

go/drive/run into sth/sb

collide with

bump into sb, run into sb

meet unexpectedly

settle in (into sw)

become familiar with new surroundings

fit in (compare with blend in) (with sth)

be socially compatible with other
members of group

sink in (no object)

be fully understood or grasped

call in on sb, drop in on sb, pop into sw,
drop/pop by/round (no object)

pay sb a short visit

go in on sth (compare with chip in £5)

share the cost of sth

get in on sth (compare with cash in on
s,t, profit from sth)

get involved in a profitable activity

home in on sth, close in on sth

approach a target

let sb in on sth, (compare with walk in
on sb, barge in on sth, listen in on sth/sb)

allow sb to know a secret, or something
clandestine

dabble in sth

take a slight interest in sth as an amateur

Visual Phrasal Verbs

He took my colleague aside for a private chat, but
I managed to listen in on their conversation.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

161

Since his marriage broke down, he has taken up a
number of new hobbies. He even dabbles in
photography these days.

We decided to go in on the bill, each of us
chipping in 30 dollars.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 311

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Some friends and I decided to sort out a surprise party for a friend. There were 10 of us that agreed to
in on the cost of laying on the food and hiring out the venue. In the end, we each
in 50 quid, and we were very happy with what we got in return; the food was delicious
and plentiful, the venue was spacious and clean, and the atmosphere was warm and cosy. Unfortunately,
someone

in on the birthday boy the day before the party and

him in

on our little secret, so the party came as no surprise.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

162

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 311

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Noticing that the police were

in on them, the driver put his foot down and drove

into the fast lane; however, the police were still gaining on them.
2

I

into an old mate while walking along the beach yesterday. Seeing his familiar

countenance brought back memories of my childhood.
3

Starting classes in a new school was very difficult, and he had problems

in. He

ended up befriending a number of kids from his chess club, and after a few months, he had
completely settled in.
4

It always takes time and effort for new vocabulary to

in, so please keep using

these words over and over again.
5

Some kids were

in their pictures, while others were putting away their toys. One

or two had already finished both of these tasks, and they were sitting up with their arms crossed,
waiting to be let out.
6

If you have already tried turning it off and on again, and still the screen remains black, please check
that you have

it in.

7

As an asthmatic, he has difficulty

8

Please

in and out when he gets nervous.

in this form; write down your full name and address.

• What was the last thing that you plugged in?
• Have you ever filled in for a colleague?
• Have you bumped into any old friends recently?
• When you go out for a meal with friends, do you usually go in on the bill?
• When was the last time you let someone in on a secret?
Are there any lucrative opportunities that you would like to get in on?

Vocabulary
usher in sth

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

introduce a new era or epoch

163

bring sth in (roll sth out, phase sth in)

introduce new legislation (phase in = in stages)

pitch in (similar to get stuck in)

share the work

chip in (£5) (compare with go in on sth)

put in money when you share the cost

join in sth, opt in (into sth)

take part in sth

rope sb in (into sth)

persuade new people to join in

rake in (intransitive) (compare with cash in on sth,
profit from sth, capitalize on sth)

make huge amount of money

reel sb in, bring sb in

attract (new customers)

do sb in

1) kill 2) tire out

box sth/sb in, fence sth in (compare block sb in)

to limit sb’s activity

count sb in (opposite is count sb out) compare
with rope sb in

include sb in a plan

blend in (into/with sth) (opposite of stand out,
stick out) (compare with fit in)

look or seem the same as surroundings

jack sth in, pack sth in

quit an activity (usually a job)

pencil sth in

provisionally schedule a plan

sign in, log on

enter a website

rub sth in (compare ‘rub salt into the wound’)

to irritate someone by reminding them of their
failure (add insult to injury)

buy sth in

buy sth in preparation for sth (e.g a party)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

164

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Unable to finish off the project before the
deadline, I roped in several colleagues to help.
With all of us pitching in, it was easy to sort
everything out on time.

I can pencil you in for Tuesday the 6th at 12:00.
If you need to bring the meeting forward or put it
off, just call me.

Some animals blend into their environment to
avoid being gobbled up by hungry predators.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

165

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 311

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

The 22nd century will

in a new epoch of the decentralization of currency. New

legislation will be

in that will do away with national currencies, leaving only

cryptocurrencies as viable payment methods. Those who bought up Bitcoin and Ethereum in the early
days will be

it in. The rally will

step by step everyone will be

in all sorts of other investors, and

into the new payment system.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 311

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I will

you in on the 22nd of September, but if you need to call off the lesson or

bring it forward, just write me an email and give me a heads-up.
2

Having heard about Bitcoin, he decided to

in on the rally, and he put all of his

savings into it. One year later, he sold off all his cryptocurrency,

in about 1

million dollars in profit.
3

The best way to

in new customers is to advertise online.

4

We don’t have enough players for our football match tonight, so do you think we could
your brother in?

5

His salary hadn’t gone up for almost 7 years, so he ended up

6

If the whole family

his job in.

in, we’ll be able to put everything away and tidy everything

up in half an hour.
7

Whenever he loses the game of cards, his older sister loves to

it in. She really

ought to have grown out of this childish behaviour by now.
8

I have always worn bright colours. I prefer not to

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

in, but to stand out.

166

• Do you prefer to blend in or to stand out?
• If you needed an extra football player for your team, who would you rope in?
• What methods can businesses use to reel in new customers?
• Does everyone in your family pitch in with the housework?
• Have you ever thought about packing your job in? Why?

Vocabulary
rein sth in, rein sth back

take control of sth (e.g emotions)

fall in with sb (get mixed up with sb, start hanging
around with sb)

become friends with (a bad crowd. usually
negative)

dob sb in, turn sb/sth in (inform on sb, grass sb up,
rat on sb, snitch on sb)

1) turn sb over to the authorities.
tell the authorities about the illegal activities of sb
2) go to bed

turn in (no object)
have it in for sb

bear/hold a grudge against sb

cave in to sb/sth, give in to sb/sth

acquiesce or yield to demands/pressure

push in, cut in (no object)

jump to the front of the queue

butt in, cut in (compare with ‘to talk over sb’)

interrupt

chime in (no object)

join in a conversation

come in for sth, be in for sth

can expect or anticipate

set in (no object)

a disease or bad weather begins (similar to the
noun ‘onset’)

let sb in

allow sb to enter

factor sth in

include sth, consider sth

call sb in (similar to call sb out)

invite organization or person to come to you and
provide a service

weigh in on sth

give your opinion on sth (controversial)

kick in (intransitive) (compare kick off with sth)

when sth starts to take effect (drugs, medicine)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

167

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The suspect caved in when the interrogators
warned him that he would be in for a lengthy
prison sentence if he carried on holding back
information.

I weighed in on the issue of late deliveries,
explaining that everything boiled down to the
unreliable suppliers we had been using.

The queue was tailing back around the street, and
it didn’t seem to be moving; I think people kept
on pushing in at the front of the queue, leaving
me standing around for hours.

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 311

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

What would you do if your cousin were picking on younger kids, beating them up, and doing them out of
money? That’s the dilemma that I came up against. He

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

in with a bad crowd last year,

168

and ever since that moment he’s been getting away with murder. Last week, I decided to anonymously
him in by sending one of our teachers a video of him lashing out at some of the
younger kids. He’ll

in for some severe punishment as his behaviour was cruel and

nasty. I hope that it will help him reflect on his behaviour and

in some of his wild

impulses.

Exercise 6

Answers on p. 311

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

If you

in all the expenses of setting up this kind of business, you’ll see that it is

far less profitable than it looks at first glance.
2

The pipes are likely to freeze up when the winter
have to

3

in, and then we’ll definitely

in a plumber.

When I’ve been waiting in a queue for a long time and someone

in, I find it hard

rein back my anger.
4

The boss has

it in for me ever since I turned up slightly late for 3 meetings in a

row.
5

He has been under her thumb since they started going out with each other, and he
in to all of her demands.

6

I usually

in just before midnight, but I get up at half past seven.

7

He has a nasty habit of

8

I

in whenever I open my mouth.

the cat in every morning, and she always wolfs down her breakfast.

• When does the winter usually set in?
• When was the last time you had to call in a plumber or electrician? What did they patch up?
• What time do you usually turn in?
• Would you turn in a family member if he was guilty of a crime?
• Do you usually cave in to the demands of your spouse?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — IN Phrasal Verbs

169

OUT Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘out’ tend to signify one of the following: direction (see sb out,
show sb out, take sb out), distribution (send sth out, hand sth out, deal sth out, give sth out), completion
(wear sb out, die out, sort sb/sth out), public speech (speak out against sth, blurt sth out, come out with
sth), or exclusion (boot sb out, throw sb out, kick sb out).
Vocabulary
see or show sb out (opposite of see/show sb in)

take someone to the door and say goodbye

put sth into sth / take sth out of sth (compare with
fish sth out)

place sth into a bag, box or wallet

let sb out (opposite of let sb in)
let sth out (similar to give out, cry out, blurt out,
shout out)

1) allow sb or sth to leave
2) make a noise

lock sb out (opposite of lock sb in)

lock the door so that sb can’t come in

cut sb out (first meaning is similar to freeze sb
out, squeeze sb out)
cut sth out

1) exclude sb from a deal

eat out (opposite of eat in) (compare with ‘send
out for’ = order a delivery)

eat in a restaurant (not at home)

break out (of prison)

1) escape 2) when fire, disease, or war suddenly
erupts

fall out of sth

fall from inside sth

walk out, run out (of sw)

leave the inside of a room or building

boot sb out, kick sb out, throw sb out

exclude sb from a school, university, or building

send sth out, hand sth out, give sth out, deal sth
out, share sth out
(compare with farm sth out = delegate)

distribute in various senses

wear sb out, tire sb out, knacker sb out (compare
wear sb down = mentally exhaust)

completely (physically) exhaust

buy sb out

buy all of sb’s shares to exclude them from
ownership

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

2) stop a bad habit (like give sth up)
3) cut sth from inside sth else

170

bail sb out

1) financially rescue a company (or a person)
2) rescue a person from jail by paying bail

sell out of sth (also, be sold out) (compare run out
of sth)

1) sell all of sth (e.g tickets) so that there is none
left
2) when a person is motivated not by principles,
but by money, they have sold out

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Doing press-ups is the best way to burn off the
calories. It will wear you out though.

As a teenager, he got bored with his classes and
started bunking off regularly. In the end, he was
kicked out of school.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

171

When he ran out of money at university, his
parents bailed him out.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 312

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Panic

out in the markets yesterday when the government announced they would not be
out two of the oldest and most reputable city banks. The liabilities of the banks will be
out among the largest creditors. There are concerns that the economy could now seize

up as a result of the closing down of payment systems. Creditors have already begun queueing up outside
the banks, in fear of losing their savings. The CEOs of the aforementioned banks claim that the
government has

them out of ongoing discussions, making it impossible for them to

offer any solutions to the crisis.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 312

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Having been on my feet all day, I was completely

2

Discipline is important in the laboratory; if anyone starts mucking around during the experiment,
they will be immediately

3

If we

out.

out.

out some of the work to software companies in Asia, costs will be

drastically reduced.
4

He

his passport out of his pocket, and handed it over to the customs official.

5

I

out the last few guests, tidied up some of the mess, and locked up all the doors

and windows.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

172

6

The thief

7

I enjoy

out a scream when he fell off the fence and landed on his back.
out, but I prefer

out for something delicious, and then

out at home with some food and a computer game.
8

Having

out of his cell, the convict now had to pit himself against three one-metre

thick, three-metre high, stone walls.

• Have you ever locked yourself out of your car or home? How did it happen? How did you get
back in?
• Have you ever thrown someone out of your house? Why?
• Do you think large banks should be bailed out with taxpayer funds?
• How often do you eat out? Which restaurant is your favourite?
• What kind of activities tire you out?
• Which musicians have sold out, in your opinion?

Vocabulary
work sth out, figure s,t out

calculate

sort sth out

organize in various senses

call sth out, cry out, scream out, shout out

speak or scream loudly and publicly

come out with sth (ridiculous ideas, odd
suggestions)

say or mention suddenly and unexpectedly

blurt sth out, let sth out (let the cat out of the bag
= idiom)

say sth publicly that should have stayed a secret

speak out against sth, come out against sth
(opposite = come out in favour of)

publicly criticize sth

chill out

relax

zone out

become catatonic

stick sth out, jut out (no object)
stick sth out (similar to see sth through, get
through sth)

1) protrude
2) (informal) to get through sth unpleasant or
difficult

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

173

lay sth out (compare set sth out)

1) arrange several objects in order 2) explain

set sth out

1) arrange several objects in order 2) explain sth
3) set off (leave)
4) start a grandiose project

set out (no object)
set out to do sth (compare set about doing,

which means start mundane task)
drop out of sth (often similar to give up) (compare
with throw sb out, kick sb out)

stop doing sth before it is finished (often
university or a course)

drag sth out, draw sth out (compare with drag on
which is intransitive)

make sth last longer than necessary

eke sth out

make sth last as long as possible for economical
reasons

block sth out

attempt to forget sth painful

bottom out (compare level out and flatten out,
which mean remain steady)

when sth (usually the price of sth) reaches the
lowest level

run out of sth (similar to use sth up)

have nothing left of sth

fall out with sb (opposite of fall in with)

stop being friends with sb

die out (similar to die off, but die off seems more
gradual) compare wipe sth out (eradicate)

go extinct

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The President has spoken out against fake news,
singling out the New York Times for making up
stories designed to drag his reputation through the
mud.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

174

I hate traipsing around the shops, but if I stick this
out for another hour or two, she might let me out
tonight.

Some say that the dinosaurs must have been
wiped out by a meteor collision. Others believe
that they died off gradually over millions of years

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 312

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

When I glanced through the document, I saw that it
mortgage, and I was quickly able to
each month. I decided to
Interest rates had
likely to

out the terms and conditions of my
out how much interest I would have to pay back

out the repayment process to the maximum term of 30 years.
out recently, so monthly repayments were fairly low, and they were
out rather than shoot up.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 312

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

We’ve

out of ketchup, so I’ll pop down the shops and pick some up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

175

out with flags draped over them, the balconies were crammed with people

2

celebrating the folk festival.
3

It seems likely that many species

out during this era due to a cataclysmic event.

4

We used to keep the tomato ketchup bottle upside down in order to

it out for a

few more days.
5

The minister has

out against the misuse of public funds, and he fully intends to

bring this issue up during the next parliamentary hearing.
6

They slave away at the office during the day, but after work they enjoy

out in

front of the TV.
7

Having drunk too much at the party, he

out how he really felt in front of

everybody, and he undoubtedly regrets it now.
8

I

out the knives and forks while my wife dished up the dinner.

• Do you just zone out in front of the TV after work, or do you chill out in another way?
• If you were a politician, which issues would you speak out against?
• Do you know anyone who tends to come out with ridiculous ideas and suggestions?
• Do you know anyone who dropped out of university? What became of them?
• How did the dinosaurs die out?

Vocabulary
peter out, fizzle out, fade out (similar to trail off,
taper off, fade away)

gradually stop or disappear

dry sth out (compare with dry up, which is when a
flow stops)

become completely dry (especially clothes)

wipe sth out (compare with die out and die off)

completely destroy, eradicate

drown sth out

make a noise that is louder than another noise

belt sth out, blast sth out

a noise is loud if it blasts out

boom out (no object)

a voice is loud if it booms out

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

176

peal out, ring out (no object)

a bell is loud if it rings out

leap out at sth/sb

become immediately obvious

thrash sth out

discuss a problem in order to come to a solution

thin out (compare with die out)

become fewer in number

level out, flatten out (no object)

remain steady (especially a price)

lose out to sb/sth (opposite of win out over sb/sth)

be less successful than opponent

iron out sth (similar to ‘smooth sth over’)

to sort out some remaining difficulties/problems

single sb/sth out

choose one person among many for praise or
blame

cheat sb out of sth, do sb out of, diddle sb out of

deceive and financially gain from sb else

play out (no object) (similar to pan out, turn out)

happen or develop

pull out (of sth) (opposite of pull in)

1) move into a faster lane of traffic 2) drop out of
(a race or competition)

act sth out, live sth out (e.g fantasies)

express thoughts, feelings or desires

look out for sth, watch out for sth, listen out for
sth

be attentive for sth

Visual Phrasal Verbs

I pulled the clothes out of the washing machine
and hung them up. As soon as they had dried out,
I ironed out all the creases.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

177

We ploughed through the snow to see where the
footprints led, but they mysteriously petered out
in the middle of the forest.

The DJ was blasting out music all night; the
music didn’t die down until 5 in the morning
when the crowd started to thin out.

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 312

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Wedding bells were

out as crowds of guests flooded into the church hall, nattering

away to their spouses and children, the noise of the conversations

out only by the

incessant ringing. After a few minutes the commotion

out, and a young priest jumped

up to take his position behind the lectern. His voice,

out to all corners of the grandiose

hall, was soft, low and enthusiastic. He
and as his voice

out love as the most sacred of Christian virtues,

out, the congregation were left with his poignant words ringing in their

heads.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

178

Exercise 6

Answers on p. 312

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

She hung all the clothes up on the washing line, and one hour later they had all
out.

2

Scientists claim there is a mountain of evidence that the dinosaurs were

out by a

meteorite.
3

The meeting dragged on for one more hour as we tried to

out an effective

marketing strategy for the upcoming quarter.
4

I’d like to

him out as the most industrious pupil in the class. No matter how

difficult the problem is, he will buckle down until he has
5

Pundits expect the price of oil to

out the answer.

out for at least another 2 or 3 weeks. But then

they expect the price to rally, and we could see it shoot up to 1500 dollars per ounce.
6

He

out of the fight the day before the boxing match was supposed to have taken

place, so the bookmakers had to call off all the bets.
7

The restaurant was packed out with customers at 6:00, but by 7:00 the crowd had started to
out as everyone was heading down to the beach for the firework display.

8

We still have a few minor difficulties to

out, but we expect to roll out the new

product by the end of this month.

• Do you like to thrash out your problems with close friends, or sort them out on your own?
• Who would you single out as the person who has influenced you the most?
• Does your voice drown out other people’s voices, or are you softly spoken?
• Do you agree that we act out our unfulfilled desires in our dreams?
• How do you think the next election will play out?

Vocabulary
be cut out for sth (similar to ‘to be/feel up to sth’,
but this is more specific)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

be (generally) capable of doing sth

179

call sb out (very similar to call sb in)
call sth out

1) ask person or organization to come to you and
provide a service
2) cry out, shout out, scream out, yell out

call sb out on sth (very similar to pick sb up on
sth) (compare with catch sb out)

criticize or point out sb’s mistake, especially a
mistaken assertion

rub sth out, cross sth out

erase or remove answer (with a cross)

bring sth out, roll sth out, (compare with come out
= intransitive)

publish or launch a product, book or film

turn out (compare play out and pan out)

1) end or become apparent (it turned out that)
2) turn off a light (also put out the light)
3) produce or make (churn sth out and turn over)
4) eject or evict (similar to turn sb away)

turn sth out (go out = intransitive)
turn sth out
turn sb out
churn sth out

quickly produce large amounts of something

clean sth out
clean sb out

1) empty sth (room) of contents
2) make sb lose money (empty pockets)

rent sth out

let a property to a tenant

pay sth out (similar to cough sth up, fork sth out)

pay unwillingly

do sth out in

decorate in a certain colour or style

grow out of sth

1) become too old or mature to appreciate or use
sth
2) become too big for sth (clothes)

draw sb out of sth (of their shell = idiom), (similar
to come out of sth)

extract sth from sth, (draw sb out of their shell =
encourage sb not to be so shy)

snap out of sth (e.g a trance or an obsession)

stop being obsessed or entranced by sth

be packed out (with sb) (compare crammed with
sb, rammed with sb)

be full of sb (e.g people)

spit sth out

eject sth from the mouth

pour sth out
pour out of sw, flood out of sw

1) pour sth from the bottle or container
2) large number of people leave sw

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

180

take sb out
(compare second meaning with do sb in, do away
with sb, bump sb off)

1) take sb to a nice place (e.g restaurant)
2) kill sb

pan out (no object) (compare with play out, turn
out, go off, come off)

happen (sometimes, happen well)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The crowd poured (flooded) out of the station in
huge numbers. Suddenly, the streets were packed
out with tourists.

Apple is bringing out a new iPhone in August, but
you will have to fork out (cough up) a lot of
money if you want one.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

181

If you use a pencil, you will always be able to rub
out your mistakes.

Exercise 7

Answers on p. 312

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

As an English teacher, it is my duty to

students out on their mistakes. When I first

started teaching, I picked them up on every mistake, but this strategy didn’t

out as

expected; some students began to fear their own mistakes and clam up. So, to

the

students out of their shells, it’s necessary to turn a blind eye to the minor errors and to focus only on the
major mistakes. Using this method, the teacher will soon be listening to his student

out

loads of complex sentences with very few blunders.

Exercise 8

Answers on p. 313

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I went to the casino last night, and they

me out. I left with nothing but the shirt on

my back.
2

The kitchen was

out in blue and white tiles with solid oak flooring. It must have

set the owners back at least 10 grand.
3

By the age of 15, I had

out of TV programs. They all seemed hopelessly childish

and intellectually barren.
4

Every time she walks into the room, you
trance. You need to

out as if you were in some kind of

out of it.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

182

5

I became a proof reader for a few weeks, but I quickly realised that I wasn’t

out

for the job. It was far too boring with very little contact with other people.
6

The city centre is always

out with tourists at this time of year. Let’s go

somewhere else.
7

The factory still

out 10000 cars every year, but they are going to cut back on staff

next month, and this will reduce their output.
8

If your answer is wrong,

it out neatly and write down the correct answer next to

it.

• Have you ever rented out a residence? Do you know anyone who has?
• What aspects of your childhood have you grown out of?
• Do you prefer your teachers to call you out on every mistake? Do you pick them up on their
mistakes too?
• Are you going to do up your place soon? What colours will you do it out in?
• Do you find it easy to churn out sentences when you write an essay?

Vocabulary
break out in sth, come out in sth (spots, a rash)
compare ‘bring sb out in sth’

suddenly become riddled with the symptoms
(spots, a rash) of a medical problem

thaw sth out (opposite of freeze) (compare dry sth
out)

when a frozen product defrosts, it thaws out

wring sth out of sb (similar to ‘drag sth out of sb’)

force or aggressively persuade someone to give
you information or money

flush sb out

force an animal or enemy out of its hiding place

root sth/sb out

find sth/sb which is difficult to find

ferret sth out

obtain information with difficulty

bottle out (of sth), chicken out (of sth)

become too scared to participate in sth

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

183

get out of sth, worm out of sth, weasel out of sth
(compare with ‘keep out of sth’)

avoid a duty or responsibility

get sth out of it

obtain a benefit from sth

bear sth out (similar to ‘hold up’, but transitive)

corroborate

sound sb out, sound sth out

test an idea on someone

come out (opposite of go in)

when sun/moon/stars or even flowers appear

hold out (for + duration)

survive in a difficult situation

hold out for sth

hope for sth

make sth out, make out that (make sb out to be)
(compare ‘put on that’)

1) perceive (especially see or hear) 2) pretend that
(pretend that sb is..)

fathom sth out (compare figure sth out and work
sth out)

completely understand

put sb out
put sth out
(compare with ‘stub sth out’)

1) inconvenience sb
2) place outside 3) turn off a light
4) extinguish

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The police tried to drag the truth out of the
suspect (ferret/root out the truth), but he made out
that he knew nothing about the crime.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

184

The enemy were holed up in the hills, but during
the night a unit of enemy soldiers attacked and
managed to flush them out.

I took the chicken out of the freezer in the
morning so that it could thaw out before dinner.

Exercise 9

Answers on p. 313

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

The detective eyed the prime suspect with cautious reservation. Out of all the witnesses that the police
had spoken to, not one piece of testimony
sticking to. It was the detective’s job to

out the alibi that this suspect had been
the truth out of the suspect under interrogation,

but he was failing miserably. The suspect was calm and self-composed, delighted that the police were
unable to

out his precise location at the time of the murder. He had

out that he was sitting in his car, leafing through the newspaper, whereas in reality he had been inside the
victim’s house, slipping poison into his dinner.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

185

Exercise 10

Answers on p. 313

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Arsenal are

out for a win or a draw against Chelsea, as either of these results will

see them move into the next round of the FA cup.
2

His 2-year-old child

out in a rash a few weeks ago; it seems to have been some

kind of allergic reaction to the washing powder that his parents have been using.
3

She

her husband out to be an expert, but in reality he knows nothing about

investment.
4

It was such a difficult test that I

out of time. I couldn’t

out the

answer to one of the questions on the last page.
5

The interrogator knew that he could use subtle threats in order to

out the

information that he needed.
6

After a bombing campaign that dragged on for 3 months, the enemy was eventually
out of it’s defensive positions.

7

It pelted down with rain for an hour, but eventually the clouds dispersed and the sun
out.

8

His mother had asked him to wash up the plates and the cutlery, but he tried to
out of it by

out that he was sick.

• Have you ever made out that you were ill in order to worm your way out of work or school?
• When was the last time you came out in a rash? What brought on these symptoms?
• Do you enjoy fathoming out maths problems and logic puzzles?
• What benefits do you expect to get out of learning English?
• Would you be able to hold out in the jungle for a few weeks? What would you feed on?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OUT Phrasal Verbs

186

ON Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘on’ tend to signify one of the following: continuation (drag on,
go on, carry on, bang on about sth, plough on), survival (get by on, live on, survive on), betrayal to
authorities (tell on sb, rat on sb, inform on sb, snitch on sb) dependence (rely on sth, hinge on sth, depend
on sth), understanding (cotton on to sth, catch on, latch on, be well up on sth, dawn on sb, be onto sb,
reflect on sth) and sexual excitement (turn sb on, come on to sb, get off on sth, try it on). The ‘up on
sth/sb’ group (creep up on sb, sneak up on sb) often signifies approach. The ‘down on sth’ group often
signifies restriction (clamp/crack/come down on sth). The ‘on to sth’ group often signifies attachment
(latch on to sth, hold on to sth, grab on to sth). The ‘in on sth’ group signifies something secret or
clandestine.

Vocabulary
happen (up)on sth, stumble on/upon sth, come
across sth, run across sth, chance upon sth
(compare with bump into sb and run into sb)

find sth unexpectedly (by chance)

lead sb on (compare put sb up to sth)

1) lure or tempt sb to do sth wrong
2) pretend to be romantically interested in sb to
gain advantage

turn sth on
turn sb on (compare get off on sth)

1) switch sth on
2) sexually excite sb

frown on sth/sb (compare look down on sb)

disapprove of sth/sb

bring sth on (similar to bring about sth)

1) cause sth to happen (often something bad)
2) used when you look forward to a future event

bring it on!
call on sth / sb
call on sb to do sth
call on sth (very similar to draw on sth)

1) visit
2) formally request that sb do sth
3) make use of sth, summon sth up

be, keep, go, bang, ramble, waffle, harp, drone,
rabbit on at sb about sth

talk continuously (often in an annoying or nagging
way)

keep on, carry on, go on (+ gerund) (for + time)

continue

drag on (for + time) (drag sth out)

continue for a long time in a boring way

play on (no object)
play on sth

1) continue playing (especially football)
2) exploit a weakness

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

187

press on, soldier on, march on (no object)

keep going (in spite of difficulties and obstacles)

bear on sth, be based on sth, have a bearing on sth

be connected to sth

verge on sth, border on sth

be almost sth (on the edge of sth)

come/crack/clamp down on sth

when authorities restrict a crime by giving harsher
punishments.

tell on sb, rat on sb, snitch on sb, grass on sb,
inform on sb (formal) (grass sb up, turn sb in)

tell authorities that sb is guilty of a crime

hang on (no object)
hang on sth, rely on sb, hinge on sth (compare
boil/come down to sth)

1) wait
2) depend on sth

boil down to sth, come down to sth

be the main reason or most essential part

Visual Phrasal Verbs

His mum bangs on at him about being on his
mobile all day, and he just turns the volume up to
drown out her racket.

The police are coming (cracking, clamping) down
heavily on pickpockets in the city, and several
offenders have already been sent down (put away,
locked up).

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

188

I happened upon a four-leaf clover, which means
I am going to be lucky. Bring it on!

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 313

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Strolling back home from work, I

upon a new advert at the bus stop. ‘Be yourself’ was

the order plastered across the centre of the picture, and in the background I could make out a blurry yet
gorgeous girl wearing a mask. She was wearing very little apart from the mask, and the advert struck me
as

on pornography. Clearly, it was made to

we feel of our own bodies,

on us to slim down, work out, dress up, and urging us to live

out our innermost fantasies, to act out our secret desires. I
it hadn’t

on the sense of shame that

on past the advert, as though

me on in the slightest.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 313

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Sending personal emails is

on in the company I work for.

2

The local council needs to

down on the number of parents that park on the grass

verges when they are dropping their kids off.
3

If you

on a second, I’ll be able to rummage through my bag and fish out the

ticket.
4

He broke off the engagement last week, and, in all honesty, I think he did the right thing. She was
him on, so I’m glad he’s finished with her.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

189

5

Whether we go to the Christmas party or not

on whether we can find a babysitter

or not.
6

The meeting

on for 3 hours, and I noticed that several colleagues were on the

verge of nodding off. The speaker
quarterly sales and
7

on regardless,

on about

on about marketing strategies.

The rise in interest rates has

on a wave of house repossessions, and economists

are worried it could spark off another financial crisis.
8

The lifestyle that he follows

on insanity: his diet is terrible, his bad habits are

numerous, and his social life is out of control.

• Which crimes do you think the local authorities ought to crack down on?
• Do you often have meetings? How long do they drag on for?
• What does success hinge on? Does it come down to luck, talent, skill, education, or something
else?
• Which bad habits do you frown on?
• Would you snitch on a relative that had committed a crime?

Vocabulary
close in on sb/sth, home in on sth/sb, zero in on
sth/sb, move in on sth/sb, bear down on sb

approach the target that you are chasing (bear
down on sb = menacingly approach)

cotton on (to sth), catch on (to sth), latch on (to
sth) (compare with be onto sb)

understand clearly

cling on to sth, latch on to sth (grab/hold on to sth) 1) physically attach yourself to sth
latch onto sb
2) follow sb (especially when they don’t want you
latch onto sth
hanging around)
3) suddenly become interested in sth
go in on sth (compare with chip in sth)

share the cost of sth

listen in on sb

eavesdrop (clandestine)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

190

walk in on sb, barge in on sb, burst in on sb

go into a room suddenly and discover sb doing sth
clandestine

be in on sth, let sb in on sth, get in on sth

be part of a clandestine plot, let sb know about a
secret, become part of the clandestine plot

pass on sth

1) transmit a message or transfer an object
2) die

pass on (no object) (same as pass away)
cheer sb on

support sb (especially in sport)

egg sb on (bad) (similar to put sb up to sth)
spur sb on (good)

encourage sb to do sth (usually bad)
encourage sb to do sth (usually good)

cheat on sb (similar to play away)

be unfaithful to sb (have an affair)

try sth on
try it on with sb (come on to sb, hit on sb)

1) put on clothes to see if they fit
2) make sexual advances, flirt (try to chat sb up)

put sth on, throw sth on, fling sth on, sling sth on
(opposite of take/throw/fling/sling sth off)
put on that + clause (make out that + clause)

1) dress

hit on sb (come on to sb, make a pass at sb, chat
sb up)
hit on the idea of sth (come up with sth)

1) make sexual advances

2) pretend

2) suddenly have a (good) idea

Visual Phrasal Verbs

We took our new colleague through our new
software, but he doesn’t seem to have caught on.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

191

During lunch, I walked in on them while she was
stroking his tie. I’m pretty sure that she was
trying it on with him. (hitting on him, coming on
to him, chatting him up)

The little boy is throwing paper planes at his
teacher; usually, his friends egg him on (put him
up to it) and he gets thrown out the class.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 313

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

As a child, he’d had problems fitting in at his new school. He tried

onto a few kids in

his class. They didn’t want him hanging around, and they tried to show him but he didn’t
on. He

on following them around in spite of the fact that they were

on him. Having put up with their taunts for 3 months, he finally

on to

the idea that he wasn’t wanted, so he gave up running around after them. It wasn’t long after this that he
found some friends who truly enjoyed his company.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 313

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

The crowd were

us on, their screams booming out from all directions.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

192

2

She didn’t

on to the fact that he had been

on her for the past

year. He made out that he was working late, but he had actually been meeting up with his mistress.
3

My mum has a nasty habit of

4

We decided to

in on me when I am nattering away on the phone.
in on some pizza, and we all had to chip in £5 to make sure there

was enough to go round.
5

My boss was mortified when I

in on him while he was getting dressed.

6

I know now that he can’t be trusted because he

7

The missile was

in on its target, but at the last moment it was intercepted.

8

Having been

on by several of his friends, he left a drawing pin on the teacher’s

it on with my girlfriend last week.

chair; giggling uncontrollably, he went back to his seat.

• Have you ever walked in on someone getting undressed?
• Does anyone try to listen in on your conversations?
• When watching films in another language, do you cotton on immediately?
• Do you fling your clothes off, chucking them on the floor, or fold them up, putting them away
nicely?

Vocabulary
pick on sb, gang up on sb

bully sb, bully sb in a group

go back on sth (e.g go back on your word)

fail to keep a promise

settle on sth

make a final decision on sth, agree to do sth

be set on doing sth

be certain and determined concerning a plan

set on sb, set upon sb (compare with run at sb,
come at sb)

attack

take sth out on sb

sb makes you angry, but you get angry and abuse
sb else

bear on sth

be related to sth

touch on sth

deal briefly with sth

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

193

creep up on sb, sneak up on sb
sth creeps up on you

1) approach sb quietly and slowly
2) sth happens gradually/slowly without you
noticing

stock up on sth (compare stockpile and
squirrel/hoard/hide sth away)

buy in lots of sth because you want enough in
future

walk out on sb

suddenly leave partner and break up

rub off on sb

acquire something (often a type of behaviour or
skill) due to regular exposure

get off on sth (be turned on by sth/sb)

get excited (often sexually) by sth

take sb on
take on sth (bring it on!)

1) employ sb
2) accept a duty or task

get by on sth (live on sth, survive on sth)

manage or survive with sth

fall back on sth (resort to sth)

use sth as a last resort

lay sth on

provide food, drink and entertainment

pin sth on sb (set sb up, frame sb)
pin hopes on sth (cling to the hope that), compare
be set on sth

1) frame sb, set sb up
2) hope very much about sth

Visual Phrasal Verbs

A group of bullies regularly gang up on him; they
seem to be set on making every school day a
living hell.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

194

Believing that the world was hurtling towards a
nuclear catastrophe, we started stocking up on
tinned food.

The girls are always messing round when we go
for a drive, and their parents don’t even tell them
off. I do hope their behaviour doesn’t rub off on
their cousin.

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 314

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Let’s

on the subject of what forms you as a person: it’s not the big plans that you are
on doing but never get round to doing, but rather the little things that you do every day.

If you spend a little bit of time honing a skill, you will eventually master that skill. The process may be
long and arduous,

on for years, but this is the price we pay for all forms of training.

Good habits can be nurtured, and they tend to

off on others,

them on

to achieve their own goals. Unfortunately, the same can be said for bad habits too.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

195

Exercise 6

Answers on p. 314

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Having

on the topic of conditionals in the previous lesson, we will now go

through the topic in much greater detail.
2

Our neighbours’ child, Peter, is always so polite and friendly. He
son, and I have always hoped that Peter’s behaviour would

3

Having been married for 20 years, he suddenly

on well with my
off on Kevin.
out on his wife and kids and was

never heard from again.
4

As a student at university, I mostly

by on cheap junk food as I was far too lazy to

cook.
5

The company will

on 50 extra staff members next year to cope with the rising

demand.
6

Old age has a habit of

up on you; day by day the grey hairs build up, and the

wrinkles pile up, but you only notice them when it is far too late.
7

The shop keeps selling out of sugar, so we ought to

8

Having been arguing about it for 15 minutes, we finally

up on some, next time.
on the red-coloured car.

• When you’re angry, whom do you take it out on?
• Did any of your parents’ talents rub off on you?
• If you knew that a food shortage were imminent, what would you stock up on?
• Do you think the police regularly pin crimes on innocent people?
• Would you be able to get by on half of your current salary?

Vocabulary
get on (no object)
get on (with sth)
get on sth (opposite = get off sth)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

1) get older or later
2) progress or do
3) enter (exit) public transport, mount bikes
4) have a good relationship with sb

196

get on with sb (compare fall out with and make up
with)
let on (no object) (compare let sb in on, let the cat
out of the bag = idiom)

reveal a secret

go off on one about sth (compare keep on about
sth, go on about sth)

rant angrily about sth

plough on (with sth) (compare carry on, go on,
march on, press on)

continue with boring task

drag on (for some time) (drag sth out)

something boring goes on too long.

draw on sth (very similar to call on sth)

1) use sth you have gradually gained, such as an
inner resource or skill (make use of, summon up)
2) breathe in smoke (from a cigarette)

wear on (no object)
wear on sb

1) time passes
2) when sth annoys or tires you, it wears on you

brush up on sth, bone up on sth, read up on
sth, swot up on sth

revise a previous topic so that you know it inside
out.

dawn on sb (it dawned on him that..)

occur to sb

be well up on sth

be well informed about sth

bear down on sb/sth (compare with close in on sb,
home in on sb, zero in on sb, gain on sb)

move towards sb in a threatening way

take sb up on sth

accept sb’s offer (opposite of turn sb down)

be onto sb

know that sb is most likely doing sth naughty or
illegal

dwell on sth

think continuously about a painful past memory

reflect on sth

1) think deeply about sth
2) give people a particular opinion about sth

bank on sth, bank on sb doing sth

be certain of (sb doing sth)

cash in on sth, capitalize on sth (compare with
‘rake it in’)

profit from

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

197

Visual Phrasal Verbs

When I bumped into him yesterday, it dawned on
me that he does dwell on the past too much.

Our sources tell us that we can bank on the share
price going up; if we plough our profits back into
the stock market, we’ll be raking it in.

She thought that nobody could see what she was
up to, but the store detectives were already onto
her.

Exercise 7

Answers on p. 314

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

As the night

on, the party died down, the guests

and the taxis pulled up outside to take them home. It

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

on coats and hats,
on me that fewer guests than we

198

expected had turned up. I was

on roughly 100 people coming, but there was only half

that number at the party. We had

on food, drinks and entertainment, and unfortunately,

a lot of the food hadn’t even been touched. I couldn’t help feeling that a lot of people had let me down,
but I tried hard not to

on this too much.

Exercise 8

Answers on p. 314

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

The weather forecast says it’s going to be sunny, but I wouldn’t

2

They offered me a job, and my first instinct was to turn them down. However, having reflected on
the pros and cons, I changed my mind and

3

on it.

them up on their offer.

The criminals had been lulled into a false sense of security, but in reality the police
onto them, and it was only a matter of time before they would be locked up.

4

Even though I enjoyed writing the novel, the process

on for years. I had to

on my childhood experiences for inspiration.
5

I’m sorry, but I have no idea who you are discussing. I

not well up on celebrity

gossip.
6

Even though the task was incredibly tedious, we had to

on in order to meet the

deadline.
7

The suspect knew the whereabouts of the criminals, but the police were unable to wring this
information out of him. He refused to

8

Our company plans to

on.
in on this new opportunity, and we expect to be raking it in

this time next year.

• When did it dawn on you that Santa is not real?
• What kind of lucrative opportunities would you like to cash in on?
• How are you getting on with this phrasal verb course?
• Do you tend to dwell on the past, live in the moment, or pin your hopes on the future?
• When was the last time you went off on one about something? Why did you get carried away?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — ON Phrasal Verbs

199

OFF Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘off’ tend to signify one of the following: removal from a
surface (peel sth off, cut sth off, tear sth off, fall off sth, give sth off, get off sth, jump off sth, wipe sth
off), departure (walk off, run off, drive off, set off, head off, make off, dash off, shoot off), delay (put sth
off, hold sth off) successful accomplishment (pull sth off, carry sth off, bring sth off, go off as planned,
come off), sleep (doze off, nod off, drop off), creation of a barrier (cordon sth off, fence sth off, seal sb
off, close sth off), and slow disappearance (tail off, fall off, taper off, wear off, trail off, die off).

Vocabulary
lift off, take off (no object)

rocket or plane leaves ground

kick off with sth

start with sth

get off sth / get on sth

1) enter or exit public transport
2) leave surface

jump off sth (a bike, a fence, a train)

jump from a surface

fall off sth

fall from a surface

cut sth off (crack sth off, snap sth off, break sth
off)
be/get cut off
cut sb off

1) cut from a surface or body

peel sth off

peel from a surface

give off sth

emit a smell or gas

put sth off (compare with call sth off)
put sb off
put sb off sth

1) delay sth until later
2) distract sb
3) make sb stop liking sth

hold sth off
hold sb off
hold off (no object)

1) delay sth until later
2) stop sth from happening
3) stop sb from winning or approaching
4) rain or snow doesn’t come

fob sb off (with sth) (compare brush sb off and
shrug sb off )

get rid of sb with a dodgy explanation or lame
excuse

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

2) get disconnected
3) stop providing (gas, electricity, funds)
4) isolate sb

200

walk off, run off, drive off, set off, head off, make leave
off, dash off, shoot off (compare sneak off and slip
off)
see sb off (see sb out) (opposite is see sb in)

accompany sb to the door and say goodbye

wear off (no object)

1) feeling or emotion gradually disappears
2) effect of drug or alcohol slowly disappears

write sth off (e.g a debt)

officially forgive sb’s debt

Visual Phrasal Verbs

A woman knocked at my door, asking if I’d mind
answering a few questions, so I fobbed her off
with a lame excuse.

Several hours later, the initial effects of the
alcohol have worn off, and the hangover kicks in.
Now, it’s best to gulp down lots of water to
rehydrate yourself.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

201

We chanced upon (stumbled across, happened
upon, came across) an old mountain cottage that
was cut off from civilization.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 314

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

I had been waiting in the departure lounge for 3 hours; my flight had already been
for one hour, and it looked as though it might be

off

off. I was heading out to a small

village in Kamchatka, in which there was no gas or electricity. Having been working online for so many
years, I wanted to feel completely
plane eventually
airport to
this feeling

off from the outside world for a week or two. The
off, 2 hours after it was scheduled to leave. My family had come to the

me off, and it was a tearful goodbye. I felt lonely when I first got there, but
off after the first few weeks.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 314

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

When my car broke down on the motorway, the engine was

2

I asked my boss whether I could knock off early on Friday, promising that I could make up for it by
working from home at the weekend, but he just

3

off a strange smell.

me off with a lame excuse.

Though we were playing up to all of our strengths, our opponents were able to

us

off for the first 80 minutes. But, in the last 10 minutes, we pulled ourselves together and managed to
score a goal.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

202

4

The neighbours have been belting out music all afternoon, and I have an exam tomorrow. The
racket has

me off my revision. How am I supposed to swot up on spectroscopy

with all this noise?
5

If the rain

off for a bit longer, we could dash down the shops and buy in some

food and drink for the party.
6

Even though I had been putting on sunblock every day, the skin on my shoulders started
off.

7

Let’s

off the lesson with a test on phrasal verbs; I’m sure you will all sail through

it.
8

They

off their bikes, ran over to the football pitch, and met up with all their

mates.

• Do you see off guests when they leave, or let them find their own way out?
• Would you like to live in a distant location, cut off from civilization?
• Have you ever had your gas or electricity cut off?
• When you have urgent tasks to complete, who puts you off so that they never get done?
• Have you ever fobbed your boss off with a lame excuse?

Vocabulary
bunk off sth

miss sth (classes) on purpose

slack off (opposite of slave away)

be lazy, not work hard enough

sneak off, slip off

leave quietly

call sth off

cancel sth

mug sb off, rip sb off (compare take sb in, diddle
sb out of, do sb out of, cheat sb out of)

cheat sb out of money

break sth off (compare with break up with sb, and
relationship breaks down)

end a relationship

doze off, nod off, drop off

fall asleep

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

203

finish sth off with sth (wrap sth up with sth, wind
sth up with sth)

finish sth completely (with sth)

brush sb or sth off, shrug sth off (compare with
fob sb off)

ignore sb’s comments, treat sb or sth as less
important than it actually is

ease off (no object) (compare ease up on sth)

1) when sth unpleasant (e.g rain) gets lighter
2) when you put in less effort or go more slowly

let off steam (compare give sth off – emit gas)

relax

shake sb off

1) escape from sb who is coming after you (by
taking various different directions)
2) remove sth from surface by shaking, wiping,
rubbing or brushing

shake sth off (compare wipe sth off, rub sth off,
brush sth off)
cordon sth off, fence sth off, seal sb off, close sth
off

create a barrier around sth

back off, leave off, shove off

stop interfering, allow sb to do sth themselves

tell sb off, give sb a ticking off

berate, scold, reprimand, reproach

bump sb off (do sb in, do away with sb, take sb
out)

kill sb

polish sth off

eat sth up, gobble sth up

pay off (no object)
pay sth off
pay sb off (same as buy sb off)

1) bear fruit (be successful)
2) completely pay sth (a debt)
3) bribe sb

live off sth or sb (feed off sth, feed on sth, live on
sth)

survive on sth or sb in a parasitic fashion

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

204

Visual Phrasal Verbs

It turned out that she had been cheating on him,
so he broke off the engagement.

Police sealed off the entire area when residents
found an old bomb. The bomb had been dropped
during the second world war, but it hadn’t gone
off.

He polished off all the food that had been laid on
by his company, for the Christmas party.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 315

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

By the time the news got round that someone had been
centre of town, the police had

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

off on the high street in the

off the entire shopping arcade in order to collect

205

evidence and analyse the scene of the crime. Both ends of the street had been

off with

yellow and black tape that warned ‘crime scene – do not cross!’ Out of sheer curiosity, I decided to walk
over to the police cordon and glance over at where the body of the victim still lay. I was immediately
ordered to

off by a rotund policeman with an angry voice. I tried a different tactic,

asking him when the body had been found, but he just

off my questions with a shrug of

the shoulders, telling me that I should read the newspaper to find out all the details.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 315

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

His parents are worried about him; he has been

off classes, and his friends say

that he is being picked on by a nasty group of kids in his class.
2

It’s been chucking it down all day, but if the rain starts to

off, we’ll go ahead with

the picnic.
3

I wouldn’t go to that shop. Last time I went there, the shop assistant

me off by

giving me a fiver instead of a tenner.
4

Having eaten up all his lunch, he started to feel sleepy and eventually

off in his

chair.
5

This meeting has already dragged on for 3 hours. I might try to

off without

anyone noticing.
6

Let’s

off the lesson with an oral test to see who has really learnt all of these verbs

by heart.
7

She

off the engagement last week when he owned up to having cheated on her.

8

One of my colleagues is prone to

off, and if he carries on like this, the boss will

get rid of him.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

206

• What do you do to let off steam?
• What time does the traffic start to ease off in your city?
• Do you ever doze off in the middle of the day?
• When someone puts you down with barbed comments, are you able to shrug them off?
• Are you the kind of worker that slacks off or one that knuckles down?
• Can you remember a time when someone mugged you off? What happened?

Vocabulary
trail off (trail away)

when a voice gets quieter

bounce ideas off sb (sound sth/sb out, run sth
by/past sb)

test an idea by discussing it with sb

fall off

1) become worse quality 2) decrease (sales)
3) fall from surface, e.g bike, wall, chair

fall off sth
level off (level out, flatten out)

remain steady

tail off, trail off (especially sounds), fall off, taper
off, peter out, fizzle out (no object)

decrease slowly, disappear slowly

pull sth off, carry sth off, bring sth off, (go off as
planned, come off)

carry sth out successfully, accomplish sth

play sb off against sb

make two people compete in order to gain some
advantage

get off work, knock off work

finish work

tick sb off, cross sb off

tick or cross names on a list

reel sth off

say all the things on a list

sell sth off (hive sth off)

sell quickly and at low price because you need
money

work sth off (compare burn sth off)

reduce sth (e.g a debt, your weight) by working

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

207

go off sth (compare put sb off sth)
fireworks/bombs/alarms go off

1) stop liking
2) stop working (the light went off)
3) be activated (firework, alarm, bomb)

set sth off, let sth off (go off - intransitive)

activate fireworks, bombs, alarms

sleep sth off

sleep in order to sober up (sleep the alcohol off)

go off on one about sth

rant about sth

die off

when a group dies gradually, one by one

branch off

split into 2 directions (e.g a road branches off)

let sb off

give sb no punishment or a very lenient
punishment

take sb off (a take-off)

do an impression of sb, mimic sb

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Some kids were setting off fireworks last night.
Car alarms were going off too, as some of the
fireworks hit the cars.

By the time he was a teenager, he had learnt how
to play his father off against his mother, and the
result was both of them fussing over him all the
time.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

208

She wrapped up by reeling off the pros and cons
of her approach. I think her presentation went off
exactly as she had planned, and it certainly went
down well with the audience.

Exercise 5

Answers on p. 315

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Bonfire night is my favourite festival, and I fully intend to ask over lots of friends and
off lots of fireworks. People don’t usually

off work until 5, so we’ll

off at 6 o clock. I’ll put together a ‘Guy’ with the kids as that’s all part of the fun. We’ll grab some wornout jeans and an old shirt, stuff them with newspaper, and stick a mask on top. Early evening on the fifth
of November, we start by setting fire to the Guy on a large bonfire, and then we move on to
off the fireworks. Some of the cheaper ones fizzle out and are rather unimpressive, so I
always invite my mate Steve, who always seems to lay his hands on the most impressive rockets in town,
which always

off with bang. The number of people at the party usually thins out at

about 10 pm, and I reckon I’ll be

off the last of them around 11.

Exercise 6

Answers on p. 315

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

The price of aluminium

off last month, but the majority of analysts expect the

price to shoot up as soon as the new legislation is rolled out.
2

One of the oldest tactics to dominate large groups is divide and rule: by splitting the opposition into
two groups, it’s possible to

3

We were

one side off against the other.
ideas off each other at the meeting, but nothing came of it. We still

haven’t come up with a good plan.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OFF Phrasal Verbs

209

4

The intruder tripped over the wire, and the alarm immediately
have

5

off. The noise must

him off, as nothing seems to have been stolen.

He was putting away a phenomenal amount of beer and wine last night, so he’s probably still
it off.

6

As he wolfed down the last mouthful of BigMac, his personal trainer kindly reminded him how
many calories were already building up in his body. He suggested that he

it all off

in the gym later on.
7

The road

off in two directions: to the north and to the north-east. We mulled over

which direction was best, and eventually went for the most northerly route.
8

She was nattering away on the telephone, but soon her voice

off as she noticed

that a tall dark handsome man had just walked through the door.

• What time do you knock off work?
• What time does your alarm go off in the morning?
• Do you like setting off fireworks at New Year and other festivals?
• Would you be able to reel off the names of ten English cities?
• How was your last holiday? Did it go off as planned?

OVER Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘over’ tend to signify one of the following: falling (fall over,
slip over, trip over, knock over), rotation (turn over, flip over, roll over), deliberation (think sth over, muse
sth over, mull sth over, churn sth over, turn sth over), reading (read over, look over, go over, pore over),
and approach (walk/run/drive/dash/shoot over to sw).

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OVER Phrasal Verbs

210

Vocabulary
slip over (usually no object)

fall over due to a slippery surface

fall over (usually no object)

fall to the ground

knock sth over (compare knock sth off the table)
knock sb over

1) knock sth/sb that is standing, so that sb/sth falls
over
2) hit sb/sth in a car, and make them fall over

bend over, lean over, bend forwards, lean forwards bend upper body
(often without object)
trip over sth (compare trip sb up)

fall over by hitting your foot against sth

run sb over (knock sb down)

injure sb by hitting them in your car

roll over

rotate body while lying down

turn sth over (flip sth over)
turn over sth

1) rotate in horizontal plane
2) relinquish a weapon, hand it in, give it up
3) produce or manufacture (similar to turn out)
4) generate revenue via sales
5) think over (mull over, muse over, churn over)
6) deliver sb to authorities

turn sb over to (the police)
move over, (move up, budge up, squash up, shove
up, shove over)

move a bit in one direction

jump over sth

jump from one side to another

boil over, spill over (often metaphorical)

1) liquid boils over the rim of saucepan while
cooking.
2) violence/anger/tension boils over (into a
protest)

boil over into sth
stop over

stay in one airport/station for the night in the
middle of a journey

stay over, sleep over (at sb’s house) (a sleepover =
noun)

stay for one night (at a friend’s place)

hand sth over to sb, pass sth over

give (by hand)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OVER Phrasal Verbs

211

read over sth, look over sth, go over sth, pore over
sth (compare go through, look through, leaf
through, thumb through)

examine a text or document, pore over means
examine carefully

glance over sth

look quickly over sth

think sth over (muse sth over, mull sth over, churn
sth over, turn sth over)

ponder sth, often in order to make a decision

take over sth

gain control of sth

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Believing that someone might be sneaking up on
her, she glanced over her shoulder.

She bent over to tie her laces up, thinking that she
might trip over them.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OVER Phrasal Verbs

212

When her friends sleep over, they all stay up late,
fiddling around with their mobile phones.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 315

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Looking through the newspaper, I quickly came across 3 different articles that bore on the protests that
were

over in the city centre. Protestors had smashed up several government buildings,

and a police car had even been

over, fortunately with no one inside, by the angry

crowds. More than 50 people had been hospitalized, and one man had even been

over

by a police van. The police seem to be losing their grip on the situation, and the author of the article
warned that certain areas of the city had been

over by protestors.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 315

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

It is a horrible dilemma for anyone to contemplate, and I have been

it over for

many weeks.
2

My daughter will be

over at her mates’ house tonight, and my son is being looked

after by his nan, so I’m asking a few friends over for a beer.
3

Can you

over, please? You are taking up all the space on this seat.

4

I

5

Running back home after class, I

6

The company

7

I’m really sorry for

over on the icy pavement, breaking my leg in two places.
over a small rock and landed flat on my face.

over more than a billion dollars every quarter.
over the vase. How can I make it up to you?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OVER Phrasal Verbs

213

8

I handed over my driving license to the police officer, and he slowly

over it,

making sure that all the details were correct.

• Have you ever seen someone knocked over by a car? Have you ever been in an accident when the
car has turned over?
• Do you often read over your English notes in order to brush up on old topics?
Are you mulling over any dilemmas at the moment?
• Are you a clumsy person? Do you often knock things over?

Vocabulary
go over to sb, run over to sb, walk over to sb (go
up to, run up to, walk up to) and many others

approach sb or sth

win out over sb (opposite of lose out to sb)

1) beat opponent
2) when one emotion takes over another emotion,
we say it wins out over the other emotion

get over sth, be over sth (compare pull through)
get over sb, be over sb

1) recover from an illness
2) recover from a break-up

ask sb over

invite sb round

smooth sth over with sb (compare with iron sth
out)

make a problem less serious by discussing it with
the people involved

talk over sb (compare with butt in, cut in)
talk sth over with sb (compare sound sb out, run
sth by/past sb)

1) speak loudly, and when someone else is already
speaking (interrupt)
2) discuss sth with sb to get their advice or
opinion

turn sb over to sb (compare turn sb in, inform on
sb, rat on sb, snitch on sb, grass sb up)

betray sb to sb (the authorities, the police)

fuss over sb (similar to clean up after sb, pick up
after sb, run around after sb)

spoil sb by helping them too much

do sb over

kill sb

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OVER Phrasal Verbs

214

win sb over (similar to bring sb round, come
round, talk sb into doing sth)

persuade sb

gloss over sth (play sth down, talk sth down,
make light of sth, downplay) (opposite of play sth
up)

pretend sth is less important than it actually is

pop over (often without object) pop by, drop by,
drop round, call in on sb

briefly visit

go back over, go back through, run back through

examine briefly once again

cloud over

1) become overcast
2) when faces and eyes cloud over, they suddenly
take on a negative appearance

come over sb (I don’t know what came over me.
Compare with ‘get carried away’)

when an emotion or feeling takes over and you get
carried away.

start over (no object)

start again from scratch

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Yesterday, while the kids were messing around,
my anger won out over my self-control; my face
clouded over; and I lost my temper. I don’t know
what came over me.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OVER Phrasal Verbs

215

Politicians have a habit of glossing over the
details, skirting around the truth, and,
occasionally, making up outrageous lies.

She has been devastated since her husband
walked out on her. I don’t think she’ll ever get
over him.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 316

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Parents who

over their kids tend to do them a lot more harm than good. While it is

understandable that mums and dads would want to help their offspring, it’s clear that too much help can
often leave the child feeling helplessly dependent on others. Therefore, it’s important that parents bear in
mind that they are bringing up future adults rather than perpetual toddlers. We must rein in our instincts to
help, allowing our rationality to
he can easily be

out over our emotions. If the child refuses to cooperate,
over with rewards and encouragement. So, the next time you find

yourself running around after your kids,

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OVER Phrasal Verbs

over these words.

216

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 316

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I’m so sorry for shouting at you like that. I really don’t know what

2

When I brought up the money that he owed me, his face

over me.
over and he barely said

another word. He doesn’t like paying people back.
3

I’m afraid he has a nasty habit of

4

Politicians have a habit of

5

His own mother

over me whenever I start to speak.
over the awkward details and skirting around the truth.
him over to the police when she realised that he had

over his neighbour and buried his body under the patio.
6

He fell out with his best friend, Martin; I offered to speak to Martin in the hope of
things over between them.

7

Manchester United looked as though they were struggling in the first half, but eventually they
out over their opponents.
back over these phrasal verbs as often as possible, and I am sure they will start to

8

sink in.

• Does your anger often win out over your self-control?
• Do you think it will cloud over for most of today, or will the sun come out?
• Did your parents fuss over you as a child?
• Which media outlets have a habit of glossing over the details?
• Do you like to talk dilemmas over with your partner, or do you prefer to sort them out on your
own?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OVER Phrasal Verbs

217

AROUND and ABOUT Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the prepositions ‘around’ and ‘about’ tend to signify one of the following:
laziness (laze around, lie around), aimlessness (faff around, mess around, hang around), and multiple
directions (ask around, shop around, walk around, look around). Around and about can be used
interchangeably in most of the verbs below. I have noted the ones which sound unnatural to my ears.
Also, please remember that we use ‘round’ instead of ‘around’ in many of the phrasal verbs below.

Vocabulary
ask around
ask about sth

1) ask many people in order to find the best
answer
2) ask specifically about sth

shop around (NOT about)

go to many shops to find best price

snoop around sw

look around a place secretly

sleep around (NOT about)

sleep with many people, lead a promiscuous
lifestyle

boss sb around, push sb around

constantly give sb orders

fiddle around with sth, mess around (with sth)
(compare tamper with sth)

1) touch or fidget with sth nervously
2) make small changes to sth to improve it

sit around, lie around, laze around

sit or lie aimlessly, be lazy

hang around sw, (stand around sw, stick around
sw, wait around sw)
hang around, (similar to faff around)

1) spend time in a place aimlessly (sw)

hang/knock around with sb

2) act or move slowly (when you need to move
faster)
3) spend time with sb

mess around, muck around, (no object = play
around, doss around, clown around)
mess sb around, muck sb around

1) behave in a silly way (misbehave)

faff around

spend time doing little things instead of doing sth
important (procrastinate)

2) cause sb problems by acting indecisively or
unfairly.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AROUND and ABOUT Phrasal Verbs

218

walk around sw, go around sw, run around sw,
drive around sw
walk around sth, go around sth, run around sth,
drive around sth

1) walk to different places (e.g as a tourist)

go around doing sth (and about)

1) spend time behaving badly so that others are
annoyed
2) to be enough for everyone in the group

go around (no object)

2) go around sth to avoid hitting it

go about sth (+ gerund compare set about +
gerund)

carry on or start dealing with a problem

get around (no object)

1) be able to go to different places
2) go from place to place
3) find a way of avoiding sth (a problem)

get around sth (NOT about) (compare ‘a workaround)
get around sb (NOT about) (compare twist/wrap
sb round your little finger, bring sb round, come
round)

4) persuade sb to do sth, especially by being nice

skirt around sth

avoid talking about sth unpleasant (e.g truth)

look around sth (NOT about)

look in many places

potter around/about sth (wander around)

move around aimlessly without hurrying

a work-around

a way to deal with an unexpected problem

run around after sb, (clean up after sb, pick up
after sb, fuss over sb)

do a lot of things for sb else (spoil sb)

turn (sth) around, turn around (no object), spin
(sth) round
turn sth round

1) rotate in the vertical plane (compare with turn
over)
2) take sth (e.g a business) that is failing and make
it successful

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AROUND and ABOUT Phrasal Verbs

219

Visual Phrasal Verbs

A new boss took over last year, and she has been
fantastic. We thought that the company might
close down, but she has turned everything around.

He spends most of his working day faffing
around on Facebook. I have no idea why the
company took him on.

We have enough pizza to go round, so please
share it out. Make sure nobody misses out on a
slice!

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 316

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

As a teenager, I wasted many hours

around the arcade machines on the seafront. I

remember saving up my pocket money and frittering it away in a matter of hours. As soon as I had run out

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AROUND and ABOUT Phrasal Verbs

220

of money, I’d

around for coins that had been missed and were still

around in the machines. Sometimes my friends and I would

around pushing and

shaking the coin-tipping machines to try to make some of the money drop out. If any of the staff ever
caught us

around with the machines, we would usually be thrown out.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 316

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I always found it particularly easy to

around my father; as long as I worked hard

as a student, he would let me get away with anything.
2

The minister did his utmost to gloss over the hideous facts and

around the ugly

truth.
3

When they offered me a job, I realised that this was an opportunity to

my life

around.
4

The defendant was

about his usual business on the day in question, and there is

nothing even remotely suspicious concerning his movements.
5

My mum always does her best to

around before she buys anything, and she

always gets good discounts.
6

If we don’t set off in 10 minutes, we are going to miss the flight, so stop

around

and pack your suitcases.
7

The journalist decided to

around, and the first thing he did was sift through the

rubbish.
8

He’s always

around his little sister, and if he has a bad day, he takes it out on her.

It’s high time his parents came down on his behaviour, but instead they just fuss over him.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AROUND and ABOUT Phrasal Verbs

221

• If I came to your house, what kind of things would I find lying around?
• Does anyone boss you around at work?
• Where do the kids hang around in your town? Where did you used to hang around?
• Do you usually buy something when you see it, or prefer to shop around first?
• Do you tend to faff around before you head out?
• Did you used to mess/muck around in class? How?

THROUGH Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘through’ tend to signify one of the following: success in spite
of difficulty (pull through sth, come through sth, get through sth, go through sth, see sth through), briefly
examine (look through sth, flick through sth, thumb through sth), and crossing through an area with
difficulty (plough through sw, wade through sw, muddle through sth).

Vocabulary
go through sth, get through sh, run through sth,
look through sth, leaf through sth, flip through sth,
skim through sth, flick through sth, thumb through
sth

1) briefly examine sth (compare with pore over
sth = carefully examine)
2) pass through sth (a stage in contest) (only go
and get through)

take sb through sth, lead sb through sth

1) (briefly) explain the way sth works
2) lead sb through an area

muddle through sth

manage to do sth even though you are no expert

think sth through (think over, mull over, muse
over)

carefully consider sth

come through sth, pull through sth, live through
sth, put sb through sth, get through sth, go through
sth

succeed in a difficult situation

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — THROUGH Phrasal Verbs

222

pull through (no object)

survive in spite of serious injury

plough through sth

1) go through an area that is difficult to cross
(mud, snow, crowded streets)
2) go through a book, in spite of difficulty

wade through sth

1) walk through a watery area (e.g river)
2) spend a long time going through a difficult task
(especially reading)

see sth through

1) continue with sth (a task) until it’s complete
2) understand the truth about sb or sth, not to be
deceived
3) to last sb until a certain time

see through sth/sb
see sb through sth (or until)
sleep through sth

manage to stay asleep in spite of lots of noise

sift through sth, rummage through sth, rifle
through sth, go through sth (compare turn sth
over)

carefully examine the contents of sth (e.g a bag)

comb through sth (go over, read over, pore over)

carefully examine a book or document

sail through sth, breeze through sth (opposite of
scrape through sth = only just pass an exam)

easily pass an exam

fall through (no object) (opposite of a plan coming when plans fail, they fall through
off)
run through sth

use up sth (money or supplies) quickly

shine through (no object)

When a quality, skill or talent becomes evident, it
shines through.

break through sth (the clouds)

1) when sun comes out, it might break through the
clouds
2) force yourself onto the other side of sth (e.g a
barrier)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — THROUGH Phrasal Verbs

223

Visual Phrasal Verbs

At first, I thought he was going to bottle out of
diving off the rocks, but in the end, his courage
shone through.

I planned on whisking my wife away on a
romantic cruise; however, these plans fell through
when I failed to talk the boss into giving me the
time off.

Initially, I couldn’t fathom out how to complete
the task. But, after slogging away for a few hours,
I managed to muddle my way through it.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 316

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

through my magazine, I stumbled upon a tragic story about a group of young students
that had got lost in the jungle; their route had

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — THROUGH Phrasal Verbs

them through a dangerous area that was

224

famous for armed gangs, dangerous animals, and treacherous mountains. Firstly, they
through a river that was crawling with snakes and piranhas. One person was bitten by an adder, so the
group decided to put up their tents and light up a fire, hoping that someone would see their smoke and
come to rescue them. They only had enough food supplies to

them through the week, so

their prospects were bleak. By the time they had
members of the group decided to

through all the food supplies, two
through the jungle in a last ditch attempt to find

civilization. Their courage and determination paid off; having been on foot for 2 weeks, living on the
berries and fruit that the jungle provided, they finally ran into a farmer that fed them and drove them back
to a nearby town. While these two members survived, none of their friends managed to
through this ordeal.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 316

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Please doctor, level with me. Do you think he’ll

through, or should I prepare

myself for the worst?
2

I’ve been

through the junk in the garage, but I still can’t find my angle grinder. I

think I might have put it away in the shed, so I’ll go and check there.
3

It is when we are

through the most difficult moments in our life that our courage
through.

4

The rain was pelting down and thunder was booming out, but I

right through the

storm.
5

He was thinking of dropping out of university, but it’s his final year. I convinced him that it would
be wiser to

6

the rest of his course through.

We had already booked up the hotel and the flight, but unfortunately the embassy turned down our
visa applications, so our plans

7

through at the last minute.

We are receiving reports that a lorry has

through pedestrians and vehicles in the

centre of the city, and police are treating the incident as a terrorist attack.
8

Hopefully, I’ll be able to

my way through the next exercise, even though I am bad

at algebra. I’ll try to come at each problem in a methodical way.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — THROUGH Phrasal Verbs

225

• Did you sail through your school exams or scrape through them?
• Do you tend to sleep through your alarm clock?
• Tell me some of the most frightening or stressful experiences that you've gone through.
• When you are in a stressful situation, which one of your positive qualities shines through?
• Can you take me through some of the daily duties of your work?
• Have you ever waded through something? Under what circumstances?
• When was the last time you had to rummage through your rubbish? And why?

WITH Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘with’ tend to signify one of the following: toleration (put up
with sth, live with sth), moving or touching sth (play with sth, fiddle with sth, tamper with sth, play
around with sth), social relations (get on with sb, make out with sb, hook up with sb, fall out with sb), and
abundance (be crawling with sth, be teeming with sth, be swarming with sth, be riddled with sth)

Vocabulary
side with sb (opp. = side against sb)

take sb’s side, support sb

go along with sth
(compare with play along with = even more
dubious that idea is true)

1) accompany
2) assume for argument’s sake that a dubious idea
is actually true
3) genuinely support an idea

take sth up with sb

complain (to sb) about sth

make do with sth (settle for sth)

use what is available, even though it is not ideal

live with sth

1) tolerate sth unpleasant that you can’t change
2) If sth lives with you, you keep remembering it
(usually a bad deed)
3) have respect for oneself (usually after a bad
deed)

live with sb
live with oneself

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WITH Phrasal Verbs

226

put up with sth

tolerate, bear

cope with sth, deal with sth

manage with sth

keep up with sth / sb

1) remain at same speed or level of progress
2) (not) understand sb
3) continue to learn and stay well informed

(not) keep up with sb
keep up with sth (e.g current affairs) (keep abreast
of sth)
have it out with sb (similar to have a go at sb, go
on at sb)

talk to sb about a problem that has made you
angry

get on/along with sb
get on with sth

have a good relationship with sb
start or continue doing sth (work)

go with sth

match sth, suit sth

get off with sb (UK), make out with sb (US)

passionately kiss

can/could do with sth

fancy, want sth

come up with sth (ideas, plans, suggestions)

have an idea

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Sipping at my coffee, I like to keep up with
what’s going on in the world

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WITH Phrasal Verbs

227

Alex would never forget how badly he had treated
his mother; the sin would live with him for the
rest of his life.

I’ve been putting the ironing off for hours. Rather
than just faff around, I ought to get on with it.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 317

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Last year, my wife

up with the idea of taking the kids on their first skiing trip. We

booked up our trip for February, sorting out our accommodation near one of the ski lifts. The room turned
out to be large and clean, which was great. However, the deafening noise of the roadworks was very
difficult to

up with. Also, there were no duvets on the beds, so we had to
do with the blankets, which were rather thin and cold. Lastly, the ski school had kids

that already knew how to ski, but our kids were complete beginners, so they found it hard to
up with the rest of the group. In spite of all these difficulties, we did have a great time.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 317

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Could anyone

with a cup of tea? I can put the kettle on.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WITH Phrasal Verbs

228

2

I don’t know how these warmongers can

with themselves when they have so

much innocent blood on their hands.
3

If you are in any way dissatisfied with our service, please

this up with a member

of staff and they will carefully deal with your complaint.
4

Wow, you look really spruced up, and your jacket

well with your shoes.

5

I was disgusted at how long it took the waiter to bring out the second course, so I decided to
it out with the manager.

6

There wasn’t an extra bed for the kids in the room, so they had to

do with the

sofa.
7

I

with the government rather than with the rebels; it seems to me that the rebel

stands for violence and crime, while the government stands for law and order.
8

I couldn’t

up with what he was saying as the noise of the traffic kept on drowning

him out.

Vocabulary
hook up with sb
hook sb up with sb

1) meet (socially or at work)
2) arrange for sb to meet sb, (business or romance)

get it over with (no object!)

get sth unpleasant finished

get away with sth (compare let sb off with)

escape unpunished

make off with sth (run away with sth)

escape with

fall out with sb / make up with sb (opposites)

break off a friendly relationship, reaffirm a
friendly relationship

part with sth (live without, go without, do
without)

live without sth (often sth very precious)

finish with sb (break/split up with sb)
finish with sth

1) dump sb, end relationship
2) stop using or needing sth

do away with sb
do away with sth

1) kill sb
2) abolish sth (e.g a law)

can/could do with sth

fancy, want sth

come up with sth (ideas, plans, suggestions)

have an idea

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WITH Phrasal Verbs

229

come out with sth (weird remarks, rude
comments, hilarious jokes)

say sth sudden, unexpected or strange

come away with sth (an impression)

be left with sth (e.g an impression or feeling)

square sth with sb
square sth with sth

1) get permission to do sth from sb
2) If one opinion or explanation squares with
another, they both seem reasonable or logical

brim with sth

be full of sth (usually enthusiasm, excitement)

be crawling with sth, be teeming with sth, packed
with sth, be swarming with sth, be riddled with
sth (disease, holes), (compare cluttered up with
sth)

be full of (often in an unpleasant way)

tamper with sth

fiddle with sth (with evil intentions)

toy with sth, (play with sth, fiddle with sth, fiddle
around with sth, play around with sth, mess
around with sth)
toy with sth (an idea)
toy with sb (similar to lead sb on)

1) keep moving or touching sth (often nervously)
2) consider an idea but not too seriously
3) pretend to love sb when actually you don’t

Visual Phrasal Verbs

It wasn’t until I peered at the combination lock
that I noticed someone had been tampering with
my luggage.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WITH Phrasal Verbs

230

Hopefully, I’ll be able to pick you up in my dad’s
new car. I just need to square it with him first.

We all doubled over in stitches; he comes out
with the funniest comments.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 317

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

I had been

with the idea of whisking my girlfriend away on a romantic weekend for

ages. She loves beach holidays, so I set some money aside for an expensive trip to the Bahamas. I
couldn’t possibly

with my new laptop, so I decided to bring that along with me. We

were standing at the check-in desk, being asked if anyone might have

with our luggage,

when it dawned on me that I hadn’t put the laptop into the suitcase. This was really irritating as I wouldn’t
be able to

up with colleagues and get some work done in my free time. As a result, I

was miserable throughout the entire trip, and my girlfriend had decided to

with me by

the end of it.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WITH Phrasal Verbs

231

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 317

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

He has been incredibly cruel to her; I don’t know how he
been

2

with her feelings all along.

Some people say we should

away with capital punishment, and I agree. A death

sentence allows the criminal to

the punishment over with sooner rather than later.

A life sentence is much harder to live
3

with himself. He has

Excuse me, have you

with.
with that magazine? You have? Thanks. I’d like to thumb

through it.
4

This temperature is unbearable. I’m breaking out in a sweat. I could really

with a

cold beer.
5

If your boss doesn’t respond to your complaints, you’ll just have to

it out with

him at the end of the day.
6

He had a habit of gibbering incoherently, so it was difficult to

up with him.

7

That class is absolutely out of control. I don’t know how you

up with them; they

come out with such rude remarks.
8

I didn’t have any tent or sleeping bag, so I made

with a small bush and a bed of

leaves.

• Which of your possessions would be impossible to part with?
• What could you do with, right now?
• Do you find it difficult to put up with the cold weather?
• Which laws would you like to do away with?
• If your salary went down by 10%, would you have it out with the boss?
• Which party do you side with in the upcoming election?
• Would you be able to live with yourself if you were doing a downright immoral though highly
paid job?
• Could you make do with a tent if there were no other accommodation for the next month?
• Who do you get on with most in your family?
• What's the best idea you have ever come up with?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — WITH Phrasal Verbs

232

FOR Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘for’ tend to signify one of the following: wrongly believing or
accepting sth (take sb for, pass for sb, settle for sth), supporting sb or sth (stand up for sb, stand for sth,
root for sb), and acting in place of sb (cover for sb, stand in for sb, fill in for sb).

Vocabulary
stick up for sb / stand up for sb

defend sb or sth that is being criticised / attacked

stand for sth

1) If a letter or symbol stands for sth, then that is
what it represents
2) tolerate or accept
3) support sth (an idea)

stand for sth (put up with sth)
call for sth
call for sth
call for sb, knock for sb

1) publicly demand sth
2) make sth necessary (demand sth)
3) knock on sb’s door

cry out for sth

make sh absolutely necessary or vital

pass for sb/sth (compare pass oneself off as sb)

be (wrongly) accepted as some type of person or
thing

take sb for sth, mistake sb for sth, play sb for sth

(wrongly) believe sb to be a certain type of person
or thing

settle for sth (make do with sth)

accept sb or sth even though it’s not ideal

feel for sb

feel sympathy for sb

fall for sth (a trick, a lie) compare be taken in

be deceived by a trick or a lie.

make for sw

run towards sw

stand in for sb, fill in for sb, cover for sb

do sb’s job as they are unable to

be in for sth (compare come in for sth)

can expect or anticipate sth (negative)

vote for sb

elect sb

root for sb (cheer for sb)

support sb

be for sth/sb (opp. be against sth/sb)

be in favour of sb

account for sth

explain

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — FOR Phrasal Verbs

233

vouch for sb / s,t

guarantee the reliability of sb or quality of sth

speak for sb (speak out for sb)

speak on behalf of sb (publicly speak on behalf of
sb)

make up for sth

compensate for sth bad

send out for sth

order a delivery (e.g of take away food)

sign up for sth

register for sth

fish for sth (e.g compliments)

indirectly try to receive sth

Visual Phrasal Verbs

They got dressed up for the party. I think they
will definitely pass for a group of zombies.

Please, put us down for the penthouse apartment,
but we’ll settle for something smaller if the
penthouse is unavailable.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — FOR Phrasal Verbs

234

The Prime Minister’s time in office had been a
complete disaster. The whole of Westminster was
crying out for a change in leadership.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 317

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

I wanted to find a new job, but I didn’t want to pack in my job at the restaurant without having something
else lined up. So, I asked a colleague to

in for me while I went to an interview at a

different restaurant. I had also asked the same colleague to
application form. My boss had
time that I

for me as a reference on my

me over for promotion more than once, so it was high

up for myself. He was

me for a fool, but I knew I was

worth more to him than he was to me. If you allow people like that to push you around, you’ll
in for more work and less money.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 317

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

I always

for my home team whenever I watch the FA Cup. If my team haven’t got

through the qualifying stages, I cheer for West Ham.
2

You’ll

in for some bad marks if you don’t buckle down and read up on all those

topics that will come up in the exam.
3

I think I

for all my colleagues when I say that you are the best boss we have ever

had.
4

There were no public toilets around, so I had to

for a bush that was situated where

the road branched off in 2 directions.
5

It’s well-known that the initials CIA

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — FOR Phrasal Verbs

for Central Intelligence Agency.

235

6

I didn’t want to steal the loaf of bread, but desperate times

for desperate

measures.
7

The building in the run-down part of town was

out for refurbishment.

8

If you keep working on your accent, you might even be able to

for an

Englishman.
9

I was sent an email supposedly from PayPal, but it was actually a phishing scam. Fortunately, I
didn’t

10

for it.

The suspect can’t

for his whereabouts on the night of the murder. I think he is

keeping vital information from us.

• Have you ever been mistaken for someone else?
• Have you ever stood in for (filled in for) any of your colleagues?
• Do you think you'll be in for a pay rise next year?
• Who did you vote for in the last election?
• If someone put you down in public, would you stand for it?
• Who could and would vouch for your good character?
• What actions do you think the current conflict in the Middle East calls for?
• I forgot a few phrasal verbs in this lesson. How can I make up for my mistake?

BACK Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘back’ tend to signify one of the following: delaying or
hindering progress (hold sb back, set sb back), returning (call sb back, go back, take sth back, bring sth
back, double back) and withdrawing (step back, draw back, pull back, back out of sw)

Vocabulary
call sb back

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BACK Phrasal Verbs

return a call

236

take sth back
(bring sth back)
take sb back, bring sb back

1) retract
2) return
3) remind (of distant past)

give sth back (hand sth back)

return sth to sb

bring sth back

1) return
2) re-enact a law (compare with bring sth in)
3) remind
4) revive

bring sb back (stir up, conjure up, summon up,
call up)
set sth back (often used as noun ‘a setback’)
set sb back

1) delay, hinder
2) cost

hold sth back
hold sb back
hold sth back

1) delay, hinder sb
2) stop, contain, restrain sb
3) restrain sth (tears, feelings, emotions)

go back on sth

break a promise

talk back, answer back (no object)

cheekily reply

step back, stand back, pull back, draw back, get
back (no object)

withdraw

think back (to sth)

think about the past (recall)

look back (on sth)

1) look behind you
2) reminisce

double back

go back in the same direction

bounce back (no object)

recover

claw sth back

to get back money you have already spent

cut back (on sth)

reduce

get back to sw, go back to sw

return

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BACK Phrasal Verbs

237

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The old photos took me back to my childhood.
Looking back on it, I see that this was a time
when I needed very little to be happy.

I doubled back to the park because I couldn’t find
my keys; I must have dropped them on the way.

I have splashed out a lot on the business this year,
so I hope I’ll be able to claw some back in tax
relief.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 318

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Last night, I had the strangest dream, which

me back to my childhood. I dreamt that my

childhood cat, Tammy, was still alive, but she was very sick. I took her to the vet, and, having examined

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BACK Phrasal Verbs

238

Tammy, he told me that she would never

back and that she would need to be put down.

He offered to do this with a lethal injection, but then he pointed out that this would

me

back £500. I couldn’t afford to fork out such a large amount of money, so I was relieved when the vet said
that I could put the cat out of its misery myself. He advised me to simply hit the cat with a large rock,
explaining that this would kill it instantly; however, when I tried to do this, the cat looked in so much
agony that I burst into tears, unable to

back my sorrow. I tried hitting it over and over

again, in order to put an end to its suffering, but each and every blow made the cat look more helpless and
made me feel more guilty. When I finally woke up, I had broken out in a sweat and could feel nothing but
remorse.

back, I think my feelings for the cat represented powerful contradictory

emotions.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 318

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

The police had cordoned off the whole area, instructing all bystanders to

2

Self-employed people try to

back.

back some of the money they have spent on their

business by taking their expenses away from their profits.
3

On hearing the joke, I couldn’t

back my laughter, even though I knew that it

would offend someone.
4

He stubbornly refused to

it back, and it was only after 3 hours of trying to win

him over that he eventually backed down.
5

When I

back on my childhood, I realise that I was very lucky to have been

brought up by my uncle and aunt.
6

The project suffered from a number of

backs. In the end, the investors backed out

of the deal, afraid that they would lose even more money.
7

When I tried to fish my wallet out of my pocket, I couldn’t find it, so I

back to

see if I had dropped it on the way to work.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BACK Phrasal Verbs

239

• What kinds of things bring back memories of your childhood?
• When was the last time you had to double back? Why?
• How much did your last purchase set you back?
• When was the last time that you had to take back your words? Why?
• How long does it take you to bounce back after a bout of flu?

TO Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘to’ tend to signify one of the following: bad behaviour (get up
to sth, be up to sth, put sb up to sth), approach (come / run / go / walk / drive / cuddle / cosy up to sth OR
over to sth), cause (come down to sth, boil down to sth, put sth down to sth), and regaining consciousness
(bring sb to, come to). The ‘up to’ group tends to signify being good or strong enough (be/feel up to sth,
live up to sth, face up to sth, come up to sth).

Vocabulary
get up to sth, be up to sth

1) behave badly
2) do (What have you been up to?)

put sb up to sth

provoke sb to do sth naughty

look up to sb
look up to sth

1) admire sb
2) look upwards

look forward to sth

be excited about sth (in future)

make it up to sb for sth (compare make up for sth)

compensate sb for sth (a kind of wrongdoing)

put it to sb that (formal)
put sth to sb

1) explain to sb that sth may be the case
2) submit sth to sb for consideration

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TO Phrasal Verbs

240

see to sth/sb (compare see about sth)
get sth seen to
see to it that...

1) deal with or take responsibility for sb or sth
2) get sth dealt with (sort sth out)
3) make sure sth is done in a particular way

stick to sth, keep to sth (an arrangement, the
schedule, a promise)

fulfil your obligation or promise

take to sth

1) master a new skill
2) begin a new hobby
3) start liking sb quickly

take to sb (warm to sb, opp.= go off sb)
turn to sb (compare confide in sb)
turn to sth

1) consult for advice
2) turn (head, car) in the direction of
3) turn into sth (informal)

cling to sth
cling to the hope that (pin your hopes on sth)

1) hold sth tightly
2) refuse to stop hoping or believing in sth

Visual Phrasal Verbs

My cousin took to windsurfing very quickly. I’m
clinging to the hope that I will find it just as easy
to master.

I put it to you, your honour, that the defendant is
unable to account for his whereabouts on the
night in question because he was at the scene of
the crime, murdering the innocent victim.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TO Phrasal Verbs

241

I will see to it that they both do their homework
carefully and that they both stick to the classroom
rules.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 318

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Having been on holiday for 2 weeks, I came back home to discover that my teenage kids had been
up to all sorts of mischief in my absence. Firstly, I saw that they hadn’t
to our agreement of never setting foot in my home office; there were signs that
someone had been rifling through my stuff. I showed them the evidence that bore out my theory of an
intruder, and I

it to them that the intruder must have been a resident of the house. Jack
up to having rummaged through my stuff, but he claimed John had

him up to it. John denied all knowledge of the affair, but I’m sure he was also involved, and I will
to it that neither of them gets away with it.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 318

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

When I come up against insurmountable difficulties, I

2

I’ve always

to my auntie for advice.

up to my older brother; he has a talent for bringing out the best in all

those around him.
3

You told me that you caught up with him on the High Street yesterday. What has he
up to? I haven’t seen him for ages.

4

I’m

forward to travelling to Japan for the winter period.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TO Phrasal Verbs

242

5

My parents are going away for a couple of weeks, and I will have to

to their cat

while they are away.
6

My dad used to take me windsurfing while I was a boy, and I

to it like a fish to

water.
7

I’m really sorry for breaking your mobile. How can I

8

I’ll need to get my mobile

it up to you?

to as it’s been playing up for the last few weeks.

• What did you get up to last weekend?
• What's the next date you are looking forward to, and why?
• Which celebrities do you look up to?
• Who do you turn to for advice?
• Do you tend to stick to your promises, or do you often go back on your word?
• If you broke my favourite vase, how would you make it up to me?

Vocabulary
come on to sb (hit on sb, chat sb up)

try to seduce sb

face up to (responsibilities)

be strong enough to face sth

live up to (expectations)

be as good as (you expected)

come up to (the required standard)

be as good as the required standard

stand up to (bullies)

be strong enough to face an enemy

drink to sb

make a toast to sb’s health

walk/drive/go/come over to AND up to (also
cuddle up to sb, cosy up to sb)

approach (in various senses)

come down to sth, put sth down to sth (boil down
to sth, hinge on sth, depend on sth)

be the cause of (X comes down to Y. I put X down
to Y)

bring sb to, come to (no object)

(make sb) regain consciousness

cater to sb/sth (also cater for sb/sth)

provide what is needed by sb or sth

come to sth

be equal to sth

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TO Phrasal Verbs

243

get around (round) to sth (often gerund)

find time to do sth

get back to sb (compare call sb back)
get back to sw

1) respond to sb,
2) return sw

get to sw
get to sb (similar to get at sb)

reach sw
upset sb

get through to sb

1) make sb (who is reluctant) understand
2) connect to sb (by phone)

talk down to sb (compare put sb down, do sb
down)

talk to sb as though they are inferior

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Our last holiday didn’t live up to our
expectations, and I put this down to the weather.

I spend all day faffing around on Facebook, but it
means that I never get round to finishing off my
errands.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TO Phrasal Verbs

244

I cater to her every whim, yet she always talks
down to me. She comes across as spoilt and
arrogant.

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 318

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Recently, we went on a trip to the beautiful village of Rye, and it certainly
reputation as the most historical town in England. We

to the village by train, and I came

with my wife and kids, which meant that the total cost of the tickets
stayed in a beautiful old cottage, which certainly

up to its

to 50 pounds. We

up to our high standards. There were

thousands of other tourists dressed up in the clothes of the 1940s, and I

this down to a

classic car festival that was going on that weekend. Unfortunately, we didn’t

round to

going to the local castle, but this was because there were so many other things to do.

Exercise 4

Answers on p. 318

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

When the patient finally

to, he could see that he was lying on a bed in a room

with white walls. He could also make out what looked like a window.
2

No matter how much she

down to you, you mustn’t let her

to

you. You need to put on a brave face and soldier on.
3

I think that all youngsters should start paying rent when they are 18. It makes them
up to their obligations as adults.

4

Whether we decide to come or not will

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TO Phrasal Verbs

down to the total cost of the trip.

245

5

And so, let’s raise our glasses and

to the bride and groom, who have a happy

future lying ahead.
6

If you don’t

up to those bullies, they will walk all over you; surely, you don’t

want to be picked on for the rest of your life.
7

I have tried to explain to my sister that she is wasting her money, but she just won’t listen. I don’t
know how to

8

through to her.

I’m afraid I don’t know how to answer that question. I will have to swot up on this topic at
home, and then I will

back to you with an answer.

• Does it get to you when people don't stick to their deadlines?
• What do you put the problem of homelessness down to?
• At what age did you face up to your responsibilities?
• When do you think you'll get round to finishing your homework?
• If your friend passed out, how would you bring him to?
• What is the best way to stand up to a bully?
• Did your last holiday live up to your expectations? Did the hotel come up to the required
standard?
• What does the issue of corruption boil down to? How can we sort this problem out?

OF Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘of’ tend to signify one of the following: avoidance (get out of
sth, weasel out of sth, worm out of sth, wriggle out of sth), smell (smack of sth, reek of sth, stink of sth)
result (become of sth, come of sth), and extraction (wring sth out of sb, drag sth out of sb)

Vocabulary
get rid of sth, dispose of sth

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OF Phrasal Verbs

throw sth away

246

let go of sth/sb

release sth (from hand)

become of sth/sb

happen to sth/sb

come of sth

result from sth

consist of sth (be made up of sth)

be composed of sth

make of sth (think of sth) (usually a question)

have an opinion of sth

smack of sth, reek of sth, stink of sth

smell (badly) of

snap out of sth (e.g a trance) (compare ‘pull
yourself together’)

get out of a bad mood, obsession or trance

talk sb out of sth (opposite talk sb into)

dissuade sb

wriggle out of sth, get out of sth, weasel out of
sth, worm out of sth

avoid sth (a task or duty)

wring sth out of sb, drag sth out of sb

extract sth (the truth, information) from sb

speak of sth

demonstrate sth

drop out of sth (similar to pull out of sth, back out
of sth)

leave a course before it finishes (‘pull out of’ is
usually withdraw from an agreement)

know of sth (hear of)

be aware of sth

grow out of sth

1) become too old or mature to appreciate or use
sth
2) become too big for sth (clothes)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

What will become of the EU in your opinion? Do
you think it will break up?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OF Phrasal Verbs

247

Rumours are going around that large businesses
were buying off politicians. The whole affair
smacks of corruption, and I’m sure no good will
come of it.

She wanted to worm her way out of the meeting,
so she went to the boss’s office to see if she could
wrap him round her little finger.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 319

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

What do you

of the latest headline claiming that, thanks to a scientific breakthrough,

maternity clinics will be offering parents the chance to choose the sex of their unborn child? A powerful
cocktail of hormones primarily

up of either oestrogen or testosterone will be injected

into the developing foetus, thereby triggering male or female characteristics. But what will
of all this? What will

of the approximate one-to-one ratio of male to

female humans? The fact that scientists can now produce this kind of technology

of

their incredible skill, but the fact that society chooses to allow this kind of technology
of our infantile morality. We turn a blind eye to the potentially dire consequences so that a few adults can
choose their baby as if he or she were a packet of grapes at Tesco.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OF Phrasal Verbs

248

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 319

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

We managed to talk them into signing the contract last month, but then they tried to
out of it last week.

2

The fact that he always remembers to say please and thank-you

of his good

manners and fine upbringing.
3

I used to love playing computer games, but when I started university, I quickly
out of it.

4

It looks as though the minister gave several profitable contracts to a business that his son-in-law
owned; the whole affairs

5

of corruption.

When my son told me that he wanted to

out of university, I tried to

him out of it. But in the end, I gave in.
6

Ever since she sent you that text, you’ve been walking around in a love-sick daze.
out of it!

7

I filled in about 30 application forms and sent them off, but nothing

of it. I didn’t

get a single reply.
8

If she is sent down for 2 years, what will

of her children? Do you think a family

member will take them in?

• How could you wriggle out of going to work tomorrow?
• Do your manners speak of your good upbringing?
• Have you grown out of cartoons, or do you still enjoy them?
• Do you think that the entire election campaign smacked of corruption?
• If we halted all attempts to limit CO2 emissions, what would come of this?
• What do you make of your current President or Prime Minister?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — OF Phrasal Verbs

249

AWAY Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘away’ tend to signify one of the following: moving away from
(back away, go away, run away, steal away), removing (whisk sb away, spirit sth away), becoming smaller
or weaker (wither away, waste away, wear away, fade away) erosion (chip away at sth, eat away at sth,
whittle away at), disposal (give sth away, throw sth away, chuck sth away), and squander (fritter sth away,
while sth away).

Vocabulary
pass away (compare with pass out = lose
consciousness)

die

do away with sth/sb

1) abolish
2) kill (informal)

put sb away (for sth) (send sb down for sth)
put sth away

1) be put in prison (for sth, for + period of time)
2) consume great quantities of sth (alcohol)

back away (from sth) (back off with no object)

reverse away (from sth)

run/scurry/go/come/slip/creep away (from sth)

move away (from sth)

whisk sb away (whisk sb off to sw)

take sb on a trip (often romantic)

spirit sb/sth away

remove sb or sth without anyone noticing

steal away (slip away, creep away)

leave without anyone noticing

get away with sth

escape unpunished (or with lenient punishment)

give sb away

1) father gives the bride away at a wedding
2) donate (e.g to charity or to a friend)
3) reveal or indicate

chuck sth away, throw sth away, toss sth away

dispose of sth, get rid of sth

turn sb away

refuse to let sb in (enter)

explain sth away (compare with shrug sth off,
brush sth off)

dismiss sth as unimportant (often to avoid blame)

fritter sth away (money, free time)

waste sth (often money or time)

while sth away (while the hours away)

waste time pleasantly

chat away

chat for a long time frivolously

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AWAY Phrasal Verbs

250

tear oneself away from sth

remove oneself from sth that you are firmly
attached to

get carried away (no object)

get overenthusiastic or overexcited

slave away (no object)

work hard

shy away from sth

avoid sth

squirrel sth away, (compare with hide sth away,
lock sth away)

stash/hoard sth, hide sth for later use

chip away at sth, eat away at sth, pick away at sth,
whittle away at sth

erode sth, gradually reduce amount of sth

wither away (flowers), waste away, wear away,
fade away (no object)

become weaker, smaller and then disappear

scare sb away, frighten sb away

frighten sth so that it leaves

trail away

when a voice gets quieter (see trail off)

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Nobody has watered those flowers, so they have
withered away. It’s high time we chucked them
away.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AWAY Phrasal Verbs

251

The action of the waves on the beach ate away at
the land until the road fell into the sea.

The thief managed to spirit away the laptop, and
then scurry away without anyone noticing.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 319

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

away on the next chapter of the book, yawning, tired of staring into the screen, I was
suddenly brought to my senses by the noise of the cat flap. Looking down, I expected to see my own cat,
but to my astonishment a large black cat crept into the room, miaowing softly. I had to
this cat away, because this was the very cat that had been slipping into my shed at night, eating up all the
food that I had left out for my own cat, then
would start to

away with a full stomach. My poor cat

away if I didn’t get rid of this thief. So, I put a few drops of water on my

hand, took aim, and fired the smallest amount of water at the cheeky intruder. She quickly
away.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AWAY Phrasal Verbs

252

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 319

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Those flowers will start to

away if you don’t water them a little more often.

2

The scarecrow is supposed to

the birds away, but the birds seem to have cottoned

on to the fact that the scarecrow is made of straw.
3

He is a hard-working chap who never

away from an extra hour of hard labour at

the end of the day.
4

When he’s in the middle of that computer game, he just can’t

himself away from

the screen.
5

He likes to

away his Sunday afternoon in front of the TV with his family.

6

I’ve been

away my small coins because I’m taking the kids to the penny arcade

on Saturday.
7

Her husband has

8

The defendant’s lawyer tried to

her away on a romantic cruise in the Mediterranean.
the evidence away, pointing out that the police

may have contaminated these items with fibres from the suspect’s clothes.

• When you are bored on a rainy Sunday, how do you like to while away the hours?
• Have you ever whisked off your partner for a romantic weekend? Where did you go?
• What kind of expenses chip away at your finances?
• Do you think we should do away with any laws? Which ones?
• If one of your friends asked you to put them up for a few months, would you turn them away?
• Do you tend to shy away from your responsibilities?
• If you knew that the Earth was doomed to catastrophe, what would you start to squirrel away?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AWAY Phrasal Verbs

253

AT Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘at’ tend to signify one of the following: attacking (have a go at
sb, come at sb, lash out at sb), watching (look at sth, glare at sth, gaze at sth, peek at sth, peer at sth, stare
at sth), or aiming (aim at sth, fire at sth, shoot at sth). It is worth remembering that ‘at’ phrasal verbs are
usually NON SEPARABLE. The object often goes after the preposition ‘at’ and rarely goes before it.

Vocabulary
scream at sb, shout at sb, yell at sb

speak loudly and angrily to sb

have a go at sb

verbally attack sb (tell sb off or put sb down)

come at sb, run at sb, fly at sb, hit out at sb, lash
out at sb

attack

come at sth (a problem)

approach a problem in a specific way

get back at sb

take revenge on sb

throw (sth) at sb, kick (sth) at sb (compare with
throw to sb, kick to sb)

throw or kick or aim or fire sth at sb in order to
hurt them

aim (sth) at sb, fire at sb, shoot at sb

aim or shoot towards sb (to kill them)

drive at sth, get at sth

mean. e.g I can’t see what you’re driving/getting
at

look at sth

watch

glance at sth

look at sth quickly

peek at sth

look at sth without being noticed

peer at sth

look at sth carefully or with difficulty

stare at sb, glare at sb

look at sth angrily

leer at sb

look at sb with sexual interest

gaze at sb

look at sb lovingly or with admiration

chip away at sth, eat away at sth, pick away at sth

erode

peck at sth (eat) (opposite of wolf down)
sip at

eat sth unenthusiastically and slowly
drink sth in small amounts

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AT Phrasal Verbs

254

talk at sb

talk to sb but without letting them comment, or
without taking an interest in their comments

clutch at, grab at (e.g straws)

try sth desperate or hopeless to overcome
obstacles or challenges

play at
what is he playing at?

1) pretend to be
2) used when you think sb is behaving in a stupid
way

work at sth (very similar to keep at sth)

try hard to develop a skill or talent

keep at sth, stick at sth

continue doing sth in order to master it

get at sth
get at sb
get at sth

1) mean (see drive at)
2) upset sb, criticize sb
3) reach sw (with arm) that is hard to reach
4) threaten sb to force them to obey (rare)

get at sb
keep on at sb about sth, go on at sb about sth,
drone on at sb about sth etc...

continually talk to sb about sth in a nagging or
annoying way.

Visual Phrasal Verbs

What the hell are they driving at? I can’t figure
out what any of this means.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AT Phrasal Verbs

255

The driver in front keeps on cutting me up. What
on earth is he playing at?

I’m going to finish with this guy: he just talks at
me, and he doesn’t even cotton on to the fact that
I’m not listening.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 319

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

at the latest headlines on physbrg, I came across an article about Phobos, which is a
moon of Mars. I quickly scanned through the article to find out what the author was

at.

The main idea was that the massive grooves on the surface of Phobos may have been caused by gigantic
boulders that rolled across its surface. Having been thrown up by a huge meteorite, these boulders rolled
around the entire circumference of the moon,

away at the rock and dust, carving out the

grooves that we gaze at through our telescopes. However,
help but feel that the scientists were

at the grooves, I couldn’t

at straws with their hypothesis. If the grooves had

been caused by such boulders, we would expect to see the grooves stretching out radially from the impact
crater. So, the evidence doesn’t bear out their conclusion, and I suspect they will have to
at the problem from a different angle.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AT Phrasal Verbs

256

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 320

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

The minister has come in for a lot of criticism recently, but she has nonetheless
out at her opponents with a fiery article in today’s newspaper.

2

I always hide the chocolate away at the back of the cupboard so that the kids can’t
at it: they aren’t tall enough.

3

He loves the sound of his own voice and rarely listens to what others have to say. He tends to
at people rather than talk to people.

4

Not being able to figure out the answer to question 5, I

at the exam paper lying on

my neighbour’s desk, trying to make out what she had written.
5

He doesn’t have a very big appetite: he tends to

at his food rather than wolf it

down.
6

The builders were

at all the pretty girls and shouting out lewd remarks.

7

His writing skills have improved in leaps and bounds, and if he

at it, he is sure to

sail through his exams.
8

She

out at the attacker with teeth and nails, biting and scratching like a savage

beast.

• Are you prone to pecking at your food or to wolfing it down?
• Has anyone ever come at you with a weapon? Did you stand up for yourself?
• What sort of things chip away at your finances?
• When was the last time your boss or parents had a go at you?
• What does your partner or mum or brother keep on at you about?
• Did you used to throw stuff at your teacher when you were at school?
• Do you know anyone who has a tendency to talk at others?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AT Phrasal Verbs

257

BY Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘by’ tend to signify one of the following: briefly visiting (drop
by, stop by, pop by), or conforming and supporting (stick by sth, stand by sb, abide by sth, swear by sth)

Vocabulary
drop by (sw), stop by (sw), pop by (sw) (call in on
sb, pop round sw, drop round sw)

visit briefly

swear by sth

completely trust or support sth (a method or
technique)

stick by sb

remain loyal to sb

abide by sth (e.g rules)

obey, conform to, adhere to sth

stand by (for sth)
stand by sb
stand by sth

1) await further instructions for sth
2) remain loyal to (stick by sb)
3) support

come by
come by sth (stumble on sth, happen upon sth)

1) visit briefly (pop round)
2) come across sth, run across sth, chance upon
sth

go by sth
go by the name of
go by sth (going by = according to)

1) go past sth
2) be called sth
3) be guided by sth

pass by, slip by, fly by, whizz by (remember:
passer-by, bystander, onlooker)

go by unnoticed (time slips by or opportunities
pass by)

run sth by sb (compare sound sb out)

test sth (e.g an idea) on sb

get by (on sth), scrape by (on sth), live on sth

survive (on sth)

set sth by, put sth by, set sth aside, put sth aside

save (time or money) for the future

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BY Phrasal Verbs

258

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Putting by £100 every week is a good idea if you
want to save up some money to do up the kitchen.

I came by a beautiful gold watch in the market. It
set me back £150, but I think it was worth every
penny.

Time slips by much faster than we think, but most
of us fritter our lives away, faffing around with
things that aren’t even important.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 320

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Ben, one of my friends, decided to lose weight using a low-carbohydrate diet. He has been
by all the rules that the diet recommends sticking to, and I’m sure that if he keeps at it,

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BY Phrasal Verbs

259

he will shed all the weight. I
He

by his place yesterday, and he was looking much thinner.

by this diet as he has tried out lots of other ones, but they were totally useless. He

has been

by on meat mostly, because on this diet fats and protein are allowed, but

carbohydrates are frowned upon. I might

this diet by my doctor and see what he thinks;

perhaps, it could work for me too.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 320

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

He earns very little money as a part-time worker; I really don’t know how he manages to
by on that salary.

2

Unfortunately, time has a tendency to

by imperceptibly; one day, you look into

the mirror and see an old man staring back at you.
3

I had a few alternative ideas for how we could turn the business round, but I decided to
them by my boss first, and see what he made of them.

4

Some people

by a vegetarian diet, while others

diet. Personally, I get
5

I would

by a meat only

on both.
by that 2015 commemorative coin, as there were very few minted, so

they are very difficult to

by. I’m sure it will cost a fortune one day,

by what the weather forecast said, we’ll get soaked through if we choose to have

6

the picnic today.
7

I offered to put my nephew up for a few days, but he doesn’t

8

She was very loyal to her husband, and she

by my rules.
by him in spite of the smear campaign

that was going on in the press.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — BY Phrasal Verbs

260

• If you earned half of your current salary, would you be able to get by?
• How often do you swing by a friend's house?
• Do you abide by laws which you disagree with?
• How much have you set by for your retirement?
• Do you stand by the policies of your current government?
• When you size someone up, do you go by their appearance or by their words?

INTO Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘into’ tend to signify one of the following: collision (plough into
sth, crash into sth, bash into sth), entry (break into sw, burst into sw) and investment (tap into sth, buy into
sth, plough sth into sth). It is worth remembering that ‘into’ phrasal verbs are usually NON SEPARABLE.
The object often goes after the preposition ‘into’ and rarely goes before it. Lastly, please bear in mind that
‘out of’ is the opposite of ‘into’ (e.g talk sb into sth and talk sb out of sth).

Vocabulary
break into sw
break into sth (a sweat, a song, a run)

1) enter a room
2) start (sweating, singing..)

burst into sw (burst into tears, burst into flames,
BUT burst out laughing)

suddenly enter a room

bump into sb, run into sb

meet sb by chance (compare come across sth,
come by sth = find sth by chance)

buy into sth

1) invest in sth
2) believe sh

dig into sth (delve into sth)

1) research sth
2) start eating sth

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — INTO Phrasal Verbs

261

dip into sth
dip sth into sth

1) spend sth (e.g savings)
2) read a bit of sth
3) put sth into sth (e.g water)

enter into sth
(not) enter into it, come into it

1) start sth (e.g an agreement)
2) be relevant, plays (no) part in this

eat into sth (eat away at sth, chip away at sth)

erode (free time, savings)

get into sth, be into sth (compare get mixed/caught become or be involved in sth
up in sth = negative)
grow into sth

become accustomed to sth with age

lay into sb, rip into sb, tear into sb (lash out at sb,
hit out at sb)

attack someone (usually verbally, maybe tell sb
off or put sb down)

squeeze into sth, slip into sth

put sth on

tap into sth

exploit a resource

talk sb into sth (opposite of talk sb out of sth)

persuade sb to do sth

go into sth/sb walk into sb/sth,

collide with sb or sth

plough into sth, crash into sth, bash into sth
plough sth (profits) into sth

1) violently collide with sth or sb
2) invest sth in sth

bore into sb/sth (drill into sth)

1) when eyes bore into you they stare at you
2) drill into sth

Visual Phrasal Verbs

We plan on tapping into the large supply of
skilled workers in that area. And, if the flow of
workers dries up, we can always farm out some
of the work to other companies.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — INTO Phrasal Verbs

262

We weren’t just lucky. We thrashed our opponents
and won the cup because we played up to our
strengths. Luck didn’t come into it.

If I dip into some savings, I’ll be able to splash
out on a new car.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 320

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Yesterday, I

into an old schoolmate in the centre of town. It was great to catch up with

him and find out what had been going on in his life. He told me he had

into a local

business, raking in huge amounts of money in the process. He was thinking of

the

profits into a new property which he would rent out to someone. He wanted to

into the

rental market because there was good money to be made. He tried to
something similar, but I’m not sure that I want to

me into doing

into my savings.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 320

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Yesterday, a large lorry

into pedestrians on Blackfriar’s Bridge, running over

more than 10 people, sending dozens to hospital, and killing 1 civilian.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — INTO Phrasal Verbs

263

2

I’m going to

into something more comfortable, and then lie down by the fire with

a nice glass of wine.
3

My older sister

into me when she heard that I still hadn’t paid off the money that I

had borrowed from Mum and Dad.
4

I think they should put aside his older brother’s clothes as the younger brother will soon
into them.

5

The two countries have

into a trade agreement, and both parties are expected to

profit handsomely from the deal.
6

The government

into the feeling of resentment that was rife among the younger

generation. Aimless and frustrated, the young were vulnerable to the crafty strategies of those in
power.
into the room, the police quickly apprehended all four suspects, pinned them

7

down, and disarmed them.
8

On Sunday, I’ll

into that phrasal verb book and brush up on some of the phrasal

verbs with ‘get’.

• When you were young, did you often get into trouble?
• Which expenses tend to eat into your savings?
• When was the last time you burst into tears? Why?
• Do you buy into the claims of global warming?
• How could you tap into new sources of income?
• Can I talk you into spending 20 minutes learning new phrasal verbs every night?
• When was the last time you broke into a sweat? Why?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — INTO Phrasal Verbs

264

AFTER Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘after’ tend to signify one of the following: doing things for sb
else (run around after sb, pick up after sb), chasing (run after sb, come after sb, go after sb, make after sb)
and similarity (model after sth, take after sb). It is worth remembering that ‘after’ phrasal verbs are
usually NON SEPARABLE. The object often goes after the preposition ‘after’ and rarely goes before it.

Vocabulary
ask after sb, enquire after sb

enquire about health, progress or whereabouts
(ask for news)

run around after sb (fuss over sb is similar)

spend time doing things for sb while they idle
away and laze around

pick up after sb, tidy up after sb, clean up after sb

tidy up sb else’s mess

model after sth, model on sth, base on sth

be made following the model of sth

take after sb

be similar to a relative (especially personality)

name after sb

be named in honour of

look after sb (take care of sb)

protect and nourish (e.g children)

run after sth or sb, make after sth or sb
(compare catch up with sb, also close/home/zero
in on sb or sth)

chase

come after sb, go after sb,
get after sb (rare)

1) succeed
2) chase

hanker after sth (yearn for sth, long for sth)

really want, especially when object is
unobtainable

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AFTER Phrasal Verbs

265

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Henry VIII came after Henry VII and before
Elizabeth I.

She hankers after his attention, gazing at him
while he gets on with his work.

She takes after her father in that they both love
dressing up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AFTER Phrasal Verbs

266

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 320

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

We had decided to

our first child after my sister, Wendy, as the latter had passed away a

few years earlier, and we wanted to honour her memory. Being cheerful and carefree, my daughter
after her mother, for I have always been of a more morose disposition, prone to fits of
depression. My wife took time off work for the first couple of years after the birth, in order to
after the baby, but Wendy

after her mother’s attention when this

period came to an end. She had to make do with the nanny we took on, but for months she would
after her mother, clutching at her dress as she set off for work. I think my wife had
fussed over the child, running around after her rather than encouraging her to learn to do things for
herself.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 321

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

My dad called yesterday, and he was

after my brother, who had been in hospital

for a few days. I told my dad that he was bearing up.
2

The police

after the back robbers, but the alarm went off, a cage rolled down, and

the police were completely sealed in, unable to escape from the bank.
3

I can never remember which member of the royal family

after Queen Elizabeth

the first.
4

The country’s legal system is

5

I wish she wouldn’t

after Anglo-Saxon law rather than Roman law.
around after her husband so much. He idles away in front of

the TV while she cooks, cleans, and
6

after the kids.

Recently, a system of fines has been brought in to encourage dog-owners to

up

after their dogs.
7

It is a classic case of unrequited love: he

after her, but she won’t even return his

gaze.
8

She looks like her father, but she

after

her mother: both of them

are downright rude.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AFTER Phrasal Verbs

267

• Do you look after anyone in your family? Who looked after you during childhood?
• Who do you take after? Were you named after any family members?
• Do you run around after your kids, or do you make them tidy up their own stuff?
• If someone managed to snatch something from your bag, would you go after them?
• Do you hanker after anything or anyone?

AGAINST Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘against’ tend to signify opposition (come out against sth, speak
out against sth, be against sth, stand against sth).

Vocabulary
come up against sth, run up against sth (problems,
difficulties and obstacles)

encounter problems/difficulties

go up against sb

play against sb in a competition

come out against sth, speak out against sth
(compare hit out at sb, lash out at sb = criticize)

publicly oppose sth

stand against sb or sth
stand for sth (opposite)

be against

side against sb or sth (opposite = side with sb)

be against sb

safeguard against sth

take precautions against sth

play sb off against sb

gain advantage by making two sides compete

have sth against sb, hold sth against sb

bear a grudge against sb

pit sb against sb

make two parties fight

count against sb

make sb more likely to fail or lose

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AGAINST Phrasal Verbs

268

turn against sb (turn on sb = synonym)

attack a former ally or friend

level sth (allegations) against sb, level sth at sb

accuse sb of wrongdoing

go against sth (rules, principles)
go against sb
go against sth (instincts)
go against sth

1) violate sth
2) be unfavourable to
3) contradicts
4) oppose

take against sb (opposite of warm to sb)

Start disliking or opposing sb

Visual Phrasal Verbs

Some dogs turn against (turn on) their owners,
biting the hand that feeds them.

I take these vitamins to safeguard against colds in
winter.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AGAINST Phrasal Verbs

269

The civil war has pit brother against brother; it
has now been dragging on for 5 years, and there
is no end in sight.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 321

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

Theresa May has

out against her critics, arguing that a deal of some sort must be

negotiated with Europe. She claims that if we were to break away from Europe with no deal, this could
possibly spark off a financial crisis. Many MPs from the Conservative party have already
against Theresa May, calling the deal a capitulation to the EU. Several politicians have
even

allegations of bribery and corruption against their Prime Minister, calling for her

to stand down. Whatever happens, it is clear that the question of Brexit has

one half the

country against the other, even dividing families and friends.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 321

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

The idea that the rich are happier than the poor

against all my experience with

these two groups.
2

Children will often

their mother off against their father in order to gain

advantages.
3

This medicine is supposed to

against colds and flu.

4

She is well qualified for the job, but her lack of experience will

against her in the

interview.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AGAINST Phrasal Verbs

270

5

We

up against several problems while trying to implement the new automatic

payment system.
6

Manchester will

up against Chelsea in the next round of the cup on condition that

Chelsea manages to knock out West Ham tomorrow.
7

His face clouds over whenever I walk into the room; he must

something against

me, but I’m not sure what it is.
8

There have been serious allegations

against the politician, and the police have

already started digging into these claims.

• What kind of difficulties have you come up against while learning English?
• Do you stand for or against the right to bear arms?
• Who do you hold a grudge against?
• Do you take any medicine to safeguard against flu?
• Have any allegations been levelled against your government or head of state?

TOGETHER Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘together’ tend to signify one of the following: gathering in one
place (come together, stay together, flock together), assembling something (throw sth together, knock sth
together, cobble sth together), or maintaining emotional composure (hold yourself together, pull yourself
together, keep it together). Lastly, please bear in mind that ‘together’ is the opposite of ‘apart’ (e.g put sth
together and take sth apart)

Vocabulary
come together (no object) (opposite is come apart,
fall apart)
stay together, keep together (opposite of split up)

unite as one group, ally as one group
stay in one group

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TOGETHER Phrasal Verbs

271

flock together, crowd together, herd together (no
object)

a group gathers in one place

bring sb together, draw sb together

make sb gather in one place

marshal sb together, gather sb or sth together, get
sb or sth together (round sb up)

arrange people to come together in one place

get together (no object)

meet

hold yourself together, pull yourself together, keep
it together (similar to man up = be braver)

maintain emotional composure (hold back your
emotions, choke back the tears, don’t get carried
away)

throw sth together, knock sth together, knock sth
up

assemble quickly

patch sth together, patch sth up

repair quickly

stand together
stick together

remain allies
remain friends, stay close to each other so you can
help each other

glue sth together

attach sth with glue

scrape sth together, rake sth together

collect small amounts (especially money) from
various sources with difficulty.

piece sth together

reconstruct an event (sth) based on evidence

lump sth together

treat 2 different things as though they were the
same

lash sth together

join two pieces of rope

fit sth together, join sth together, go together (no
object)

combine pieces which join

put sth together (opposite of take sth apart)
cobble sth together

assemble
assemble with minimal time or resources

club together (no object) (compare go in on sth,
and chip in)

pay for sth as a group by splitting the cost

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TOGETHER Phrasal Verbs

272

Visual Phrasal Verbs

The tears were trickling down his cheeks, so I
told him to pull himself together! There’s no
point bawling your eyes out.

We lashed together some bamboo with some
rope, cobbling together a small raft in just a few
hours.

My daughter took up karate last week. I was
surprised to see that all the kids were lumped
together in one class, regardless of how long
they’d been doing it.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 321

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

To celebrate the New Year, I tried to
St Petersburg. It was difficult for some of my mates to

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TOGETHER Phrasal Verbs

together a few mates that would come with me to
together enough cash for the

273

trip; therefore, we decided to

together so that we could afford a big flat in the city

centre. This ended up being far cheaper than going to a hotel. The flat wasn’t in very good condition:
some of the beds were broken and the dining-room table was wobbly. But, we managed to
together the broken parts of one of the beds, so this wasn’t a problem. We all wanted to
see different sites in the city, and so we agreed to split up during the day. However, in the evenings we
together and found some delicious restaurants.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 321

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Sherlock Holmes was trying to

together the events that led to the young

engineer’s mutilated hand.
all the branches together with a piece of rope, Robinson Crusoe was able to build

2

a raft.
3

Tortoises and turtles are completely different animals, yet they are often

together

because of their numerous similarities.
4

I thought that he would be able to

himself together at the funeral, but I was

wrong; he got carried away and burst into tears, sobbing uncontrollably as the coffin was lowered
into the ground.
5

I tried to

together enough money for a trip to Thailand, but I had to back out in

the end as I hadn’t saved up enough.
6

When the new wardrobe from IKEA arrived, I started

it together straight away as

I know the kids always love playing around with the empty cardboard boxes.
7

Four of us have a birthday at roughly the same time of year, so this always

us all

together for a party.
8

Don’t just sit there feeling sorry for yourself. You’ve got to

yourself together and

find a job.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — TOGETHER Phrasal Verbs

274

• Did you enjoy putting together models as a child?
• Which events tend to draw your family together? How often do you get together?
• Do you think all children should be lumped together in one class, regardless of ability?
• When was the last time you had to club together to buy something? What were you going in on?
How much did you each chip in?
• Are you able to hold it together when you are under pressure, or do you often get carried away?

AS Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs that include the preposition ‘as’ tend to signify how people seem in terms of personality
(have sb down as sth, come across as sb, strike sb as sth, have sb pegged as sth) or in terms of appearance
(disguise sb as, pass as sb, pass sb off as sb)

Vocabulary
disguise sb (oneself) as sb

make sb (oneself) look like sb (appearance)

pass as sb (pass for sb, mistake sb for sb)

manage to look like sb else (appearance)

pass sb/sth off as sth (similar to disguise sb as)

falsely represent sb as sth (appearance)

come across as sth or sb
strike sb as sth

appear to be sth (personality)
appear to sb to be sth (personality)

have sb down as sth, put sb down as sth, mark sb
down as sth, have sb pegged as sth, peg sb as sth
(take sb for sb)

believe sb to be sth or sb (personality)

look on sb as sth

consider sb to be sth or sb

hold sb up as sth

believe sb to be the ideal example of sth or sb

double up as sth

have an alternative function or use

save sth as

save a document on computer

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AS Phrasal Verbs

275

go as far as, go so far as (+ noun or + to plus
infinitive)

reach an unexpected extent

Visual Phrasal Verbs

My brother holds her up as a paragon of virtue,
but she strikes me as a dark horse with a few
skeletons in the closet.

The sofa doubles up as a bed. Just pull out the
bottom drawer if you want to put the bed
together.

The burglar passed himself off as a policeman in
order to get into the house and snoop around.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AS Phrasal Verbs

276

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 322

➔ Fill in the gaps with the verb in the correct form:

One of my favourite stories during childhood was Billy Budd. In this story, Billy Budd is
up as a shining example of a morally good man and a perfect sailor. In contrast, we
meet the antagonist, Claggart, who

on all his fellow sailors as bad men. Claggart is one

of the senior officers, and he

across as nasty, violent, and cunning; he even

so far as to make a very sick man work, in spite of the captain’s orders to the contrary,
and this ultimately results in the man’s death. Jenkins, one of Billy’s shipmates, has Claggart
as a murderer after this event, so he plots to get his own back; however, when Jenkins
attempts to creep up on Claggart with a knife, he is apprehended by Billy, who immediately realises
Jenkins’ purpose. He struggles with the would-be assassin, disarming him swiftly, saving Claggart from
an untimely demise.

Exercise 2

Answers on p. 322

➔ Fill in the blank spaces with the verb in the correct form:
1

Our bedroom

up as my wife’s office: she works from home.

2

The thief managed to

himself off as an employee from the bank. Once he was

inside, he broke into the main vault, gathered together the most expensive items, and slipped away
without a trace.
3

I

the document as ‘Phrasal Verbs Book’, but when I tried to call it up on the

screen, a lot of what I had written seemed to have gone missing.
4

Even though she is actually 35, she could easily

as a 21-year-old; she loves

working out and staying in shape.
5

I

6

People

him down as an utter fool, but I soon learnt how wrong I was.
on him as a wonderful philanthropist and a human-rights defender, but all

I see is a smug narcissist.
7

I thought he

across as an authority on the matter during his presentation. He put

his ideas across very well, and the audience quickly warmed to him.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AS Phrasal Verbs

277

I wouldn’t

8

as far as to say that the pupil is lazy, but he certainly needs to find

some more motivation for this subject.

•
•
•
•
•
•

Who do you hold up as a shining example of a virtuous man?
Who do you have down as a striking example of an immoral man?
Have you ever disguised yourself as someone else?
Were you able to pass yourself off as an adult while you were still 16?
Does your bedroom double up as your office?
Would you go so far as to say that all politicians are corrupt?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — AS Phrasal Verbs

278

ANTONYMS

Go back over some phrasal verbs that you have already come across by memorizing their antonyms.
These words should ring a bell as all of them have already cropped up in this book. Some are complete
opposites, and some less so. Please fill in the gaps.

Exercise 1

Answers on p. 323

I do my best to

in the crowd when

He always wears such bright colours that he

I don’t want to be noticed.

out like a sore thumb wherever he
goes.

We

out of petrol in the middle of

We

up with petrol before we set off

the journey
Manchester United

out to Chelsea

in the FA Cup

Chelsea

out over their rivals,

Manchester United

Dad offered to

me up from the

Dad offered to

me off at the station

station
I
He

my wallet out of my pocket
off his clothes and collapsed on

the bed
I’d like to

my wallet (back) in my pocket

Having slept through his alarm, he
on his suit and rushed off to work

out for all those victims

affected by the tragedy
The car

I

I feel I ought to

out against the

widespread idea that euthanasia is a good thing
up as it was turning the

If you don’t

bend, and the driver lost control, veering off the

an accident

down, you might have

road

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Antonyms

279

The boss

down on anyone who

regularly takes a day off

I

up to the ancient Greeks as the

masters of grammar

Exercise 2
Would you like to

Answers on p. 323

out or stay in,

tonight?

Shall we go out and have a meal or
in?

I usually

up until about 01:00am

We’ll need to

the deadline off a

few weeks

I prefer to
Let’s

in early at 10:30
the deadline forward so that

we finish earlier

The boxer

out his opponent in the

final round

The doctor used smelling salts to
the boxer round

I tried to

him out of his trip to the

I managed to

plastic surgeon, but he wouldn’t listen

the party

As a child, I loved

We’ll need to

together models

of tanks and aeroplanes

before we move out

The newspaper says that the tide will

The tide will start

out at 10:30am tomorrow

him into coming to

apart the furniture

in at 16:36 and it

will be full-tide by 18:00

It started to cloud over and the sun

The sun will

in.

and you’ll feel much warmer

The sun

up at around 6:30

The sun will

out in a few minutes

down at 16:30

You shouldn’t take on too much at work; you will

If I manage to get out of the jobs that my boss

get

gave me, I’ll be able to

out

We have decided to

on 10 new

employees

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Antonyms

We’ll have to

out.
go of 10 new

employees

280

Exercise 3

Answers on p. 324

You should

them up on their job

You should

their job offer down

offer
I

up with him in the end; it was

We argued about money, and in the end we fell

silly to argue

with each other.

When I realised how mean and selfish he was, I
off him
He

I

to him as soon as I found out how

much we had in common

through all his exams

I only just managed to

through my

exams.
Let’s

together or else we may get

lost

Let’s

up so that we find our

missing friend quicker

The rain will

on in the next hour

If the rain

off for an hour, we

won’t get soaked
This pupil finds it easy to

up with

the others
I usually

That pupil always

behind the

others
to my auntie for advice

I went to a night club but they

me

away
He’s very modest, so he always

He’s boastful, so he always

down his achievements

successes

I need to
Someone has

up by the radiator
down my tyres

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Antonyms

I need to
Now, I need to

up his

down by the window
the tyres up

281

Exercise 4
We can

Answers on p. 324

him in for the holiday

Is that the doorbell? Go to

the

guest in
He

We can

him out for the holiday

He’s leaving now. Go to

him

out/off
himself in the toilet

I

The BBC

out against Brexit

The voters

The young

against Brexit

The old

myself out of my own house
out in favour of Brexit
for Brexit

They

with the E.U

We

against the E.U

They

against Brexit

We

for Brexit

He

in with a bad crowd (got mixed

He

out with his best friend

up with)
My clothes were

through (really

I

my clothes out on the radiator

wet)
He’s been

off all week, zoning out

in front of the TV
He was

He’s been

away all week, so he’s

worn-out
at his food

He was

down his food very

quickly
That old sofa is
She

apart
into the office without a care

in the world

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Antonyms

You need to
She

together the sofa-bed
out of the office with a face

like thunder

282

SYNONYMS AND CLUSTERS

I find phrasal verbs easier to memorize when they are put into different groups of similar meanings. I
hope these sentences bring back some of those phrasal verbs that won’t sink in. Please fill in the gaps:

Decorate or make more beautiful

Answers on p. 325

As soon as we moved into the new place, we decided to
I

it up.

myself up for the party. I wanted to look my best.

She

herself up, hoping that she would end up meeting someone at the club.

I only

up for formal events, such as weddings.

Persuasion

Answers on p. 325

He

me over with a bribe of £1000.

He

me into playing on the football team, but then my wife

me out of

it.
If he doesn’t take you up on the offer, I will try to
I’ll

up to my boss. Hopefully, he’ll

I will try to

him round.
round.

round the boss tonight. Hopefully, I’ll

him round my

little finger.

A breakdown in relations
After only 6 months, they
Their engagement
They
He

Answers on p. 325

off their marriage.
down after a succession of rows in public.

up soon after she found out that he had been
out on her when he found out she had been

Having walked in on her boyfriend in another girl’s arms, she

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

away.
on him.
with him.

283

Losing and regaining consciousness
He was in such excruciating agony that he
paramedics were able to

Answers on p. 325

out for a few minutes. However, the
him round/to with some smelling salts.

The boxer

out his opponent after only 30 seconds in the ring.

Having been on his feet all day, he

out during the wedding ceremony, but he

round/to a few seconds later.

Sexual Excitement
He

Answers on p. 325

on to her while they were chatting at the bar, but he came out with some sleazy lines

that she found a real

-off.

He has

on all the women in the department, but his advances are always rejected.

The perpetrator of these awful crimes clearly

off on both frightening and humiliating

his victims; he needs to feel the anguish of the victim in order to get

on.

He thought that she was in love with him, but she was actually just

him on

Hold on to sth
We

Answers on p. 325

on to the edge of our seats as our driver lost control of the wheels and skidded

across the motorway.
As I fell backwards, I waved my arms around,

at the smaller twigs; however, these just

snapped off in my hands. It was quite a big drop, and I ended up in hospital.
The parasites

on to their victim, and then feed off the blood.

Reporting sb to authorities
He

Answers on p. 298

his associate over to the police as soon as they put a bit of pressure on him.

When one of his classmates threw a paper plane at the teacher, he immediately

on the

pupil.
The police paid him £1000 on condition that he
In the end, his colleague

in all of his criminals associates.

on them, and they were all put away for a long time.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

284

Having been

up by his best mate, he was sent down for 5 years.

Find sth or sb by chance
I

Answers on p. 325

upon a beautiful gold watch at the market.

When he

the old photos, tears started trickling down his cheeks.

As soon as we turned the corner, we

into 2 of my old teachers.

Continuation

Answers on p. 325

I thought that our player had been deliberately brought down by their defender, but the referee told us to
on.
The meeting was incredibly tedious and, what’s more, it

on for hours.

In spite of the teacher telling the kids to keep it down, the class

on screaming and

shouting.
We ought to

on despite the awful weather, otherwise we won’t get back until very late.

The professors at university would often

on at us for hours about all sorts of utter

nonsense.
I found it so tedious to write the essay, but I

on and got it done by midnight.

Appearing
Not only did he
I am sure they will

Answers on p. 325

up 15 minutes late, but he also sneaked off early too.
in the next few minutes. Let’ s be patient.

I have noticed lots of new firms
If any problems should

up all over the city.
up while you are answering the questions, put up your hand and

I will come over.

Depression and rejection
He is constantly having a go at me. It really

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

Answers on p. 326

me down.

285

People who go around

others down are often those who can’t put up with jokes aimed

at themselves.
I’m going to have to

down their offer: it is far too low.

We arranged to meet up at seven o clock, but once again he

me down.

Cause and effect
I

Answers on p. 326

most of the delays in our shipments down to our unreliable suppliers.

The delays that we have experienced
Everything

down to our unreliable suppliers.

on our unreliable suppliers.

The new law is bound to have lasting consequences. What do you think will

Resigning and redundancy
The minister was forced to

of it?

Answers on p. 326

down when the news broke out in the papers.

Having slaved away for weeks without any raise in salary, I decided to

in the job.

The management are forced to make cutbacks, so several departments will be downsized, and around 20
employees will be

off.

Getting sick
He

Answers on p. 326

down with an awful stomach infection and started

up all over the

place.
I

up a nasty infection when I had a holiday in the tropics. But, I

over

it a few weeks later.
I

out in a sweat regularly whenever I have a fever.

That new washing powder has

me out in a rash. (I

out in a rash after

using that powder)

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

286

Noise gets quieter

Answers on p. 326

I wish the neighbours would

the noise down. Their music keeps me up all night. I

might go and tell them to

it down.

If those kids don’t

down, I’m going to go upstairs and tell them off.

The noise of the party

down at around 03:00 am.

His voice

off when he saw the hideous apparition creeping up on her.

Clandestine

Answers on p. 326

I could

you in on a little secret, but you must promise to keep it to yourself.

At first, we thought that it was only the manager that was responsible for the fraud, but then we found out
that a few of his deputies

in on it too.

He can be so nosey; he has a nasty habit of
Our enemies

in on other people’s conversations.

in on us while we were discussing the secret plot.

A rival gang has been attempting to

in on some of their business.

Going to people and places for a short time
I

Answers on p. 326

in on my Mum on the way back from work, and picked up some of my stuff that was

cluttering up her garage.
We

into the supermarket on the way home, to pick up some bread.

We’ll

by (or round) in 15 minutes.

Introducing sth new
The cheaper air fares

Answers on p. 326

in a new period of overseas tourism

The government will be

out the new legislation next week.

The new system will be

in over a period of six months.

In spite of several setbacks, the new laws will be

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

in next year.

287

Spending money

Answers on p. 326

As the kids had sailed through their exams, we decided to
Nobody likes having to
Having

out on a skiing trip.

out large amounts of money to the tax man.
off all my debts, I was now able to start

some money up for

the future.
The total cost of the work would

to £16000, so we started

some

money aside in advance.

Sharing work or cost

Answers on p. 326

If we all

in £5, we’ll be able to

in on a pizza.

Let’s all

together, and then we can share out a pizza.

OK, so it looks like a massive job, but if we all
We might need to

in, we’ll sort it out in no time.

in a few more volunteers to get this project finished on time.

Publicly declare

Answers on p. 326

The suspect had been holding out on them, but eventually he
He

out the truth.

out with some really odd suggestions sometimes.

Several high-profile celebrities have

out against the new laws that will be brought in

next month.
The dire situation

for actions, not words.

Removal from a surface
The kids had been bouncing around all day, but eventually they
He
The lion
I
The engine was

Answers on p. 326

off the trampoline.

off the ladder while he was painting the wall.
his whole arm off during the attack.
off the skin and handed the orange over.
off a peculiar smell, so we pulled over and had a look under the bonnet.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

288

Sorting out your schedule

Answers on p. 327

I don’t think I will be available on Monday, so can we

the lesson off for a week?

I will

you in for Monday the 16th of January, but if you can’t make it just email me and

we’ll

it off.

We could

the last meeting forward a few days, and then we will have time to iron out

any remaining difficulties.

Eating and drinking

Answers on p. 327

I splashed out on the most expensive meal on the menu, and

it up in seconds.

You really ought to slow down when you drink alcohol: you

those beers down far too

quickly.
Look at how fast he

down his dinner.

He doesn’t seem to have any appetite; he just sits there

at his food.

There were a number of cakes left on the plate, but I

them all off.

Ignoring people and things

Answers on p. 327

Journalists and politicians are notorious for

over the details and

around the truth.
The minister has come in for a lot of criticism this week, but he has

off the comments

in the media, claiming that they are politically motivated.
Whenever anyone knocks on my door, asking for money, I

them off with a lame

excuse.
She made up lame excuses to

away the missing money.

Happening according to plan
We had laid on lots of food and drink, and, fortunately, the party
planned. It certainly

Answers on p. 327

off exactly as we had

down well with all the guests.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

289

We were under a lot of pressure to finish the project before the deadline, and I didn’t think we’d be able to
it off.
They set up a new business, but things didn’t

out as well as they had hoped.

Studying

Answers on p. 327

I really ought to

up on my algebra, and then I will

I’ll barely

through the test if I don’t

If you regularly

through the test.
over those formulae.

over the phrasal verbs, they are bound to

Feelings and emotions

in.

Answers on p. 327

I don’t know why he got so

away. He seemed to

himself into an

angry frenzy, losing control of himself.
In the last poem, he let his imagination

away with him, so I found it hard to understand

what he was getting at.
I’m not sure what

over me, but suddenly I found myself screaming at the top of my

voice. I think I had been

up a lot of anger, and I had to finally let it all out.

Be good enough or strong enough
He is already 18, so he is certainly old enough to
Unfortunately, the hotel didn’t
level of service didn’t
You really ought to

Answers on p. 327

up to his responsibilities.
up to our expectations; the main problem was that the

up to the required standard.
up to those bullies; if you don’t, they will push you around for

years.
I didn’t

up to going into work, so I called in and explained that I had come down with

flu.

Leave without anyone noticing
We

Answers on p. 327

out of the meeting while no one was looking.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

290

We

away while everyone’s backs were turned.

The thief must have

away the painting between one and two o clock.

Ways of looking

Answers on p. 327

The builders

and whistled at the pretty girls, shouting out lewd comments as they

passed by.
He

at his girlfriend with an adoring expression on his face.

When they found out that I was responsible for the mess, they both
Using the microscope, I
He

at me.

at the small insect on the glass slide.

at me for a few seconds, then turned around and left.

Having stashed away a piece of paper with the answers, I

at them while no one was

looking.

Attack

Answers on p. 327

The soldier

a grenade at the enemy.

The mugger

at me with a knife, so I turned round and ran away.

He threatened to

his dog on me if I didn’t get off his property.
out at my attacker with teeth and nails, I managed to get out of his grip.

Come together
My family and other relatives
Christmas is a time that
I had to

Answers on p. 327

together every Christmas for a big party.
together the whole family.

together 50 people for the Christmas party.

I’m not sure I’ll be able to

up 50 people for the party.

Combine

Answers on p. 327

The pieces of this puzzle don’t

together.

My son has spent the whole day

together one of his toys.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

291

I managed to

together a high voltage supply with some old electronics that were lying

around.
We

the pieces of wood together in order to make a raft.

Appear to be or believe sb to be

Answers on p. 328

He managed to

himself off as over 18 even though he is only 15.

I have always

him down as an idiot, but now I see that I was wrong.

Don’t

me for a fool, or you will regret it.

He

across as cold and aloof, but he is actually just shy and untalkative.

He

me as meticulous and professional, and his team

on him as a good

boss.
His colleagues

him up as a saint, but I know better.

Respond to sb or sth at a later time
I’m afraid I can’t speak now, so I’ll have to
We have

Answers on p. 328

back to you at a later time.

up on their complaints, and we have found that the grievances were well

warranted.
We need to

on these complaints, or else our business will suffer.

We also need to

up our suppliers, and find out why deliveries have been held up.

Survive on sth
As students, we

Answers on p. 328

by on loans from the bank and part-time jobs.

When we realised we could

do with a smaller house, we decided to sell up and move

out.
The herbivore
He

on plants, while the carnivore

on other animals.

the generosity of others.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

292

Deception
He

Answers on p. 328

out that he was a very wealthy man, but the truth was very different. However,

everyone

for it.

You all thought that I was upset, but I was actually
We were all

in by the lies that were going round in the newspapers.

Unfortunately, he was
The taxi driver

it on.

out of his fortune by his relatives.
me off by taking a much longer route.

Loud noises
The wedding bells were

Answers on p. 328

out and the crowds were gathering together to throw confetti

over the bride and groom.
I couldn’t hear what he was saying because the noise of the road works
The sound of the radio was always

out during lunchtime.

He had a deep voice which would

out whenever he gave a speech.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Synonyms and Clusters

out his voice.

293

ANSWERS

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

294

MOST COMMON
PHRASAL VERBS

3
4
5

Exercise 1

from p. 5

I got up at half past seven, put on my trousers, and buttoned up
my shirt. Putting my wallet and keys into my jacket pocket, I
came into the kitchen and switched on the kettle. My son was
putting together a boat with pieces of Lego while my wife was
taking bread out of the toaster. Since I had overslept, I gobbled up
my breakfast, drank up my tea and dashed off to work. Getting
into the car, I realised I had forgotten to put some important
documents in my briefcase, so I rushed back into the house and
picked them up.

Exercise 2
1
2
3
4
5
6

7
8

from p. 6

He took a grenade out of the ammunition box and threw it at
the enemy.
Having finished work, I went out of the building, got into the
car, and started the engine.
I had to take the wardrobe apart in order to transport it to the
new house and fit it through the front door.
You ought to put on a coat, or you’ll freeze to death.
The platform was crawling with tourists, so it was extremely
difficult to get on the train.
The children were wrapping up presents to give to the family,
but musing over what presents they might put down on their
own Christmas lists.
Tie up your shoelaces, tuck in your shirt, and tie back your
hair; you need to look smart for the interview.
Taking off his hat, he apologised to all those who were
gathered around him.

Exercise 3

from p. 9

I’m really looking forward to going skiing at the end of February.
My wife and I have decided to go without the kids as they are still
too young to go skiing. Fortunately, my mum has offered to look
after them for the duration of the trip. I have asked a friend
whether he wouldn’t mind dropping us off at the airport, and I am
sure he won’t let us down. My wife is worried that one of us will
fall over on the slopes and break a bone, but I reassured her,
explaining that we will only go down the easier slopes. I am
cutting down on cigarettes at the moment, and I hope that this trip
will make it easier for me to give up completely; it always seems
easier to stop bad habits whenever you change your routine.

Exercise 4
1

from p. 9

Our dog got lost in the woods, and so we started to look for
her; the woods were massive, so we split up, thinking that we
would find her quicker if we went in different directions.
2 Can you find out what time our plane takes off on Saturday?
I need to pass the details on to our taxi driver.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

6
7
8

Nowadays, many people are aware that cutting down on
carbohydrates can immediately lead to weight loss.
It was so icy in the town centre that many people were
slipping over on the pavement.
I have always got on well with my auntie’s family; we have a
lot in common and they are rather laid-back, which makes
them easy to chat to.
Unfortunately, he is not a very punctual person; he will often
let you down by not showing up at the appointed time.
I’m sorry, but I can’t speak to you at the moment. Can I call
you back in half an hour?
I tripped over a large rock that was lying on the path, and it
left me screaming in agony.

Exercise 5

from p. 11

I get on well with most members of my family, so I wasn’t
surprised when my sister, Jenny, asked if I’d mind looking after
her daughter on Friday night; and, not wanting to let her down, I
said that I’d be delighted to help. At 7:30 in the evening, she
turned up with my niece and told me that she would be back to
pick her up at 10:30. I had run out of food, so we decided to send
out for a pizza. Unfortunately, the delivery driver broke down en
route, so the pizza arrived late and rather cold. As the shop hadn’t
even bothered to cut the pizza up, I called the manager to make an
official complaint. We tried heating a few slices up in the oven,
but they weren’t so tasty; we ended up throwing most of it away.
We have learnt our lesson: next time we will eat out.

Exercise 6

from p. 12

1

I thought that I had sailed through most of the test, but I
couldn’t figure out the answer to the last question.
2 We need to look after the environment by picking rubbish up
and throwing it away.
3 I’m looking forward to eating out at that incredible restaurant,
splashing out on the most expensive dish, and wolfing it all
down with enthusiasm.
4 He asked her out, but she turned him down; she didn’t like
what he did for a living.
5 Having played atrociously for the entire match, I felt as though
I had let the whole team down.
6 There were several particularly violent scenes in the film
where body parts were cut off.
7 My lunch had already cooled down, so I decided to heat it up
in the microwave.
8 My son called, asking for help, so I agreed to pick him up at
16:00. Unfortunately, there was a traffic jam, so I ended up
dropping him off at the station at 18:00. But breaking down
on the way back meant that I had to call out the AA (vehicle
repair service).
9 I’m going to give up smoking eventually, but firstly I’ll cut
down.
10 He turned up late 3 days in a row, so the boss had a go at him.
However, I don’t think the boss will let him go.

Exercise 7

from p. 15

Dashing off to work, I turned up the volume on my headphones to
make them louder, and ran down the road. My colleague had

295

agreed to pick me up at the corner of the street. It was a freezing
cold morning, and when I got into the car, my mate turned on the
heater to warm me up. I was incredibly tired, so I dropped off in
the passenger seat. This was a good idea as the traffic was tailing
back on the motorway; it took me almost 2 hours to get to work.

5

6
7

Exercise 8
1
2
3
4
5

6

7
8

from p. 15

If we set/head/dash/shoot/take/tear off in five minutes, we
will definitely get there on time.
That music has been belting out all night. I am going to tell
them to turn it down.
I think a teacher ought to pick students up on their mistakes;
otherwise, they won’t improve.
I can’t work out the answer to question 7, and I’m not sure
how I ought to come at the problem.
I am sure that he was trying to rip/mug me off; on two
different occasions, he has given me a five-pound note instead
of a ten-pound note.
You ought to sit by the fire to warm up; it is freezing at this
time of year and you haven’t wrapped yourself up for this kind
of weather.
He came into a great deal of money when his great aunt
passed away.
We were in the middle of a conversation on Skype when we
suddenly got cut off.

Exercise 9

from p. 17

When I found out that I had put on another 10 kilograms, I
decided it was high time I started working out and cutting down
on sweet food. I signed up for a one-year subscription at my local
sports centre, hoping that I would burn off lots of calories in the
swimming pool, on the badminton court, and in the gym. During
my first visit, I managed to pull a muscle while working out, no
doubt because I hadn’t warmed up before getting on the machines.
After my second visit, which was to the swimming pool, I came
home and began throwing up. I put the symptoms down to a nasty
stomach infection that I must have picked up while swimming.
And on the third visit, which was to the badminton court with my
best friend, I was informed that I would have to pay extra for the
badminton court. The subscription fees were incredibly expensive,
so I was taken aback to learn that I would have to fork out even
more money. In the end, I gave up trying to lose weight at the
sport’s centre and splashed out on a new bike.

8

9

DO Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

1

from p. 18

He stopped working out at the gym, and since then he has put
on about 20 kilos.
2 I’ll be taking off as soon as the boss wraps up the meeting; I
have to go to great lengths not to drop off while he’s going on
about performance standards.
3 One of my colleagues gave me a lift to work, but someone cut
us up on the way there, and we crashed into his car, so I
turned up late again.
4 We decided to do up our flat during the autumn period; we
want to do our bedroom out in a new colour.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 20

The fact that we decided to do up our flat had nothing to do with
the barbed comments that some friends had come out with during
their last visit. The day after the visit we splashed out on new
flooring and wallpaper, doing the whole ground floor out in a
Victorian style. I couldn’t possibly do without my cosy fireplace,
so we decided to keep it but paint over it once again. The flooring
company tried to do us out of 2000 quid, but we had already
figured out that the total cost should only come to £1500; having
taken the problem up with senior management, we were quickly
given a complete refund. We only have to iron out a few problems
next week, and then the renovations will be finished. No one will
have the nerve to run our house down again.

Exercise 2
1
2
3
4
5
6

Exercise 10

I forked out £20 on it last week, and by today it had already
broken; The shop definitely ripped me off, so I’ll be taking it
back tomorrow, and I expect a full refund.
He came into a lot of money when his great aunt passed away,
so he splashed out on a Ferrari.
The enemy were holed up in the mountains for 3 weeks,
refusing to give up. Eventually, we came up with a way to
flush them out.
Every time we chat on the phone, she’s either rambling on
about money, waffling on about her children, or banging on
about the latest gossip.
He broke down in tears when his girlfriend said she had been
cheating on him.

7
8

from p. 21

People tend to dress up if they are going to the theatre.
Most people in the modern world find it very difficult to go
without their phone for a few days.
Having done a lot of sport this morning, I could do with a
large bottle of water; I am thirsty and completely worn-out.
I think the government ought to do away with capital
punishment: it doesn’t do anybody any good.
Her mother is always doing her down. She makes the same
scathing remarks over and over again.
His own brother did him out of his inheritance, so now he is
done for.
This course will make you do the same phrasal verbs over and
over again, and I hope they eventually will sink in.
We did our whole house out in blue, but this had nothing to do
with me. It was my wife’s idea.

296

MAKE Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 24

Having introduced himself, the journalist made out that he was a
solicitor representing several members of my family. He wanted to
ferret out as many details as possible in regards to my father, who
had passed away in the previous year. I wanted to see exactly what
he was jotting down on his notepad, but I couldn’t make out his
handwriting. He asked me what I made of the stories that had been
put out in several newspapers regarding my father’s extra-marital
activities. I replied that a number of malicious family members,
bearing a grudge against my father because he had diddled them
out of a small fortune, had made up a number of stories in order
to get their own back. The ‘solicitor’ reeled off many other
personal questions that I felt were inappropriate. In the end, I
threw him out for his impertinence, but I did get in touch with my
disgruntled relatives; I made up for my father’s bad deeds by
cutting them in on the inheritance that I had received.

private lives. It’s easier to get on with your friends, your
colleagues and your family members by getting into grammar.
And it’s easier to get your message through to the audience when
you jazz your speech up with a few rhetorical devices. While it is
true that some successful people do get by with a very limited
vocabulary, you should always do your best to polish up your
vocabulary and brush up your grammar.

Exercise 2
1
2

3

4

from p. 24

5

The bank robbers had made off with thousands of pounds, but
the police car was bearing down on them.
2 I’m so sorry for throwing away that box containing all your
old photos. I had no idea what was inside. How can I make it
up to you?
3 What do you make of the new Prime Minister? Do you think
he’ll do away with some of the disastrous policies of the
previous government and start bringing in some more effective
ones?
4 If you don’t have an ashtray, you’ll have to make do with this
plate. But please, don’t stub it out on the plate. Put it out under
a cold tap, then get rid of it.
5 Journalists regularly make up stories in order to manipulate
public perception; they often make out that they are impartial
judges who pass on indisputable facts. In reality, they churn
out the same rubbish week after week.
6 Brian broke up with his girlfriend on Friday, but by Monday
he had already made up with her.
7 I felt as though I would throw up, so I made for the toilet.
8 I made up for my mistake by splashing out on a bunch of
flowers.
9 The press have been making him out to be a monster, but in
reality he has been doing good deeds all his life.
10 The course is geared towards all levels and abilities, so classes
are made up of students from a wide range of backgrounds.

6

Exercise 2
1

7

Exercise 4
1

3

from p. 27

5

Getting across your ideas in a concise and clear manner is an
essential life skill. If people don’t understand what you’re getting
at, you’re less likely to get what you want in both your public and

6

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 30

I have always got on with my sister’s family; her husband is
getting on a bit, but he is still young at heart; her kids are always
getting up to something, but they love mucking about with my
own kids; and my sister is always going on about her colleagues,
but her stories are hilarious. I’ve been so tied up with work for the
past few months that I only got round to inviting them over last
weekend. Firstly, my brother-in-law tried to wriggle out of it as he
was snowed under at work, but in the end he caved in to our
demands and agreed to join us. They got to our house at 19:00,
and we immediately sat down to have dinner. Unfortunately, the
meal was a complete disaster as the meat had gone off, so we had
to get rid of it. Instead, we sent out for a Chinese take-away, and
this managed to make up for the terrible dinner.

4

Exercise 1

When I was a student, I mainly got by on junk food as I
couldn’t be bothered to cook.
During those hard times, it was very difficult to get by; we got
behind with our mortgage repayments, and we had nothing set
aside for a rainy day.
Even though the criminal was caught, he got away with it in
the end; I thought he was going to be sent down for at least 5
years, but the judge let him off with a suspended sentence.
I don’t know when I will get round to doing the washing up;
I’d better crack on with this homework before I knuckle down
with the housework.
If he keeps getting at you with snide comments, you need to
stand up for yourself!
If you leave your name and number, I’ll get back to you as
soon as I’m available.
I took up windsurfing as a child, but then gave it up in
adolescence. Recently, I have got back into it.

Exercise 3

2

GET Phrasal Verbs

from p. 28

from p. 31

I am desperate to have tomorrow off, but I don’t know how I
can wriggle out of it. What kind of excuse should I make up?
It’s not so easy to wrap the boss around my little finger.
It took me 30 minutes to get through to the relevant
department. I won’t be calling them back in a hurry!
She’s incredibly good at getting round her father. He’s such a
soft touch! (He is very easily manipulated)
I’ve been trying to make her understand that she should finish
with him, but I can’t get through to her.
Look at the time! As it’s getting on, we ought to set off;
otherwise, we won’t be in time for our flight.
To get through the winter, many animals stock up on food
supplies, find a safe place, and sleep.

297

Their engagement broke down last week, and he still hasn’t
got over losing her.
8 He’s rather sadistic: he seems to get off on hurting others.

Exercise 2

Exercise 5

2

7

from p. 33

In the last year of university, I got mixed up with a bad crowd. My
new friends spent most of their time bunking off classes and
getting drunk. They weren’t interested in getting anything out of
their courses. One night, we all got carried away and ended up
vandalising several buildings on campus. News soon got round
that we were the culprits, and I decided to own up to my own role
in these crimes. However, the dean of the university wanted to
know who else had played a part in these mindless acts of
destruction, so he asked me to turn in my so-called friends. When
I refused to grass them up, I was swiftly kicked out of university.
Not one of my new friends apologised for how the situation had
played out, and this really got me down.

Exercise 6
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

from p. 34

The price of gold shot up last week. It really got me down as I
had just sold off the rest of my gold investments before the
price skyrocketed. I completely missed out on the rally.
If you want to get in on the oil price, you’ll have to buy up
some shares soon.
Sherlock Holmes was determined to get to the bottom of the
mystery and to fathom out exactly what had happened.
When the news got out that the company would go bust, the
share price plummeted.
We ought to get down to finishing the project, or else we’ll
still be working on it next year.
He gets off work at 18:00, so let’s meet up at 18:30.
When I was getting in the taxi, my sleeve got stuck in the
door, tearing off a couple of buttons.
The ferry docked at the Port of Calais, and we all had to get
off and go through customs.

1

3
4
5
6

Exercise 1

Taking off my hat and coat, I started to inspect the library around
me; the room was massive, and the bookshelves were crammed
with books of all descriptions. The librarian was taking down a
sign that exclaimed ‘silence’ and putting one up in it’s place that
said, ‘please turn off all mobile phones and devices’. I quietly took
my book out of my bag and began reading; the book was ‘Lord of
the Flies’, and the front cover took me back to my teenage years,
because I had already read the book at school. The cover showed
Piggy’s broken glasses, hinting at the evil murder that would soon
take place. As a boy, I had enjoyed reading this story; however, as
an adult, I understood that the book contained dangerous ideas that
legitimized man’s evil impulses as unavoidable desires.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 39

Last week my old boss stepped down, and I was hoping to take
over our department. I was happy to take on all the extra
responsibilities because it meant a move up the pay scale and a
much bigger office. My paperwork had been piling up in
cardboard boxes that were taking up far too much space, so a
move into a bigger office sounded fantastic; however, yesterday
the CEO took me aside and asked what I made of Peter, a
colleague of mine. He was interested in putting Peter in charge of
the department, so he wanted to know if the rest of the department
got on with him. I was so taken aback that I was speechless for a
few seconds; nevertheless, I managed to hold back my anger and
tell him that Peter was a strong candidate and an easy-going
colleague. Today, the CEO took me aside once more and told me
that he had changed his mind and would like me to take over; I
immediately took him up on the offer.

Exercise 4
1

3

from p. 36

The soup that I had for the first course was disgusting; I took
this up with the manager, and they offered not to charge me
for this meal.
I had to take apart my old sofa in order to get it through the
door of my new house.
I took my boss aside as I wanted to say something to him in
private.
All my old books were taking up far too much space, so I
decided to stash them away in the attic.
He takes after his father: they both work themselves into a
state too quickly. They need to learn to control their emotions.
When I was 14, I took up windsurfing; I loved it because I
loved being on the beach, and the air was so fresh when I was
surfing the waves.

Exercise 3

2

TAKE Phrasal Verbs

from p. 37

4

5

6

7

from p. 40

The smell of plasticine always takes me back to my
childhood; sometimes, I wish I had never grown up.
While I was young, I would spend hours putting together
models of tanks and boats and planes; when they were
finished, I would jazz them up with a lick of paint.
If she got angry, she would usually take it out on her younger
siblings.
When I got home I flung off my jacket and tie, threw my keys
and mobile on the table, and collapsed on the sofa; the long
day had really taken it out of me.
To learn phrasal verbs in detail, there is a large amount of
vocabulary to take in; indeed, it make take a few months to
fully sink in. But you won’t regret it.
I take after my father; both of us are forthright, and we will
speak out if we see good reason to. Last week, I saw that the
council had once again failed to collect the bins on time, so I
took the issue up with my local MP.
They took the great detective for a fool, and doing so was
their greatest mistake. For while he came across as an idiot,
Columbo was not only a great detective but also a master
tactician. He knew that if he made out he was stupid, the
culprit would be more likely to make a mistake.

298

8

The factory took on 50 new employees last month. The
managers hope to turn out twice as many cars next year.

Exercise 2

GIVE Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

1

from p. 43

My children had been going on about the new theme park for
months. In the end, I gave in to their demands and promised to
take them out for a day. The theme park was 30 km away, and the
kids were bickering the whole way there. I had to give them a
stern ticking off, which quickly shut them up. Next, the car started
giving off a strange smell, so I pulled over to have a look under
the bonnet. At first everything seemed OK, but when I pulled out
into traffic, the engine gave out. In the end, we had to give up on
the idea of the theme park, and I felt guilty for letting the kids
down even though it wasn’t my fault.

Exercise 2
1

2
3

4

5

6

putting on her face. He handed over some new cream, but my
niece didn’t want to use any more skin creams. After some gentle
persuasion she came round; and after a few days of using the
cream, the rash had faded away.

from p. 43

Unfortunately, she fell in with a bad crowd as a teenager. She
started falling behind the other pupils, and eventually even her
teachers gave up on her.
If the soldiers are captured, they might give away our
position, thereby endangering a vast number of lives.
If I don’t give back that library book soon, my mum will give
me a ticking off. She has been going on at me to take it back
for months.
The soldiers had been holed up for a number of weeks, and
their enemies were attempting to flush them out of their
positions. They held out for about 24 days in total. In the end,
they gave up on reinforcements showing up, and came out of
their positions with the white flag waving.
The doctor warned him to give up alcohol or face serious
consequences, which included the possibility that his heart
would give out.
The teacher gave out the homework for next week. She then
reminded us to look through all the phrasal verbs we had
already studied and learn them by heart.

COME Phrasal Verbs

2
3
4
5

6

7
8

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 50

The Secretary of State for Education came in for severe criticism
today when he asserted on Twitter that European education
standards didn’t come up to British standards. Several opposition
MPs came out against the minister, calling on him to step down. A
Liberal Democrat claimed that Britain would come up against
difficulties during future negotiations because of these barbed
comments, even suggesting that we may not get through Brexit
with a free trade agreement. The Prime Minister is expected to
rein in the members of her party, coming down heavily on their
irresponsible use of social media.

Exercise 4
1

2

3

from p. 46

My niece was admitted to hospital last week as she had come
down with a nasty skin infection. Her parents first noticed the
infection when her face came out in a rash. They tried applying
some cream, but this made the red marks come out even brighter
than before. In the end, they went to the hospital and found a
specialist, and one who came across as very knowledgeable in his
field. He asked how the symptoms had come about, but not one of
my relatives had the foggiest idea. He told them the rash could
have been brought on by a new cosmetic that my niece had been

When his great uncle died, he came into a fortune, so he
splashed out on a new car.
He’s a peculiar person that comes out with the strangest things
when you’d least expect it.
How did last night’s fire come about?
The shock was so great that our protagonist passed out. But
within a few seconds, he was already coming to/round.
Their success comes down to their skill. Luck doesn’t come
into it. Talent is what it all hinges on. And talent boils down to
training.
We bought in lots of food, sorted out loads of games, and
asked over hundreds of people, but the party didn’t come off
as well as we had hoped.
The weatherman says that the rain will hold off and the sun
will come out in an hour or two.
We’re going on a trip. Would you like to come along?

Exercise 3

4

Exercise 1

from p. 47

5

6

from p. 50

I’m really sorry! I don’t know what came over me. When I
saw the pickpocket creep up on her and fish out her mobile, I
got carried away and lashed out at him.
The police ought to come down more heavily on those
managers of firms that have a poor safety record. If the firms’
health and safety procedures don’t come up to the required
standard, they ought not to get away with it.
I broke out in a rash the day after I came down with the flu.
So, I popped into the chemist’s to pick up some medicine.
You’ll probably come up against a few difficulties in question
three, but if you come at the problem in a rational and
methodical way, you ought to be able to figure it out.
The mugger, brandishing a large blade, came over to the
passer-by and quickly snatched the phone out of her hands.
The victim, in fear for her life, just froze up. There were
several onlookers, but no one was brave enough to make after
the thief.
Several politicians came out against the idea of a second
referendum, claiming that another vote would undermine
democracy. Theresa May has ruled out a second vote under all
circumstances.

299

7

I can’t remember his name at the moment, but if I stop
dwelling on it, I’m sure it’ll come back to me.
8 The minister has come under a great deal of scrutiny since
making those comments.

around the office, and running around after my boss. Last week, I
let my emotions run away with me; I blurted out that the
management ought to consider taking on more staff members to
cope with the increasing workload. Faces immediately clouded
over as no one from management really wanted to run up more
expenses than were absolutely necessary.

PUT Phrasal Verbs

Exercise 2

Exercise 1

1

from p. 54

Many people put the problem of youth-homelessness down to
poverty, but many other factors can play a part. Some adolescents
come up against difficulties when their parents, angry with their
offspring for one reason or another, kick them out of the house.
They may feel embarrassed to ask other members of their family
for help, as they may not want to put them out. And if no one else
in the family is willing to put them up, they are unlikely to find a
home. Other teenagers have parents that are hooked on narcotics
or alcohol. If the parent of the child refuses to give up or cut
down, the child may be unable to put up with their behaviour and
thereby leave home. Lastly, the child may have been put down
(and even beaten up) by other family members, and this may be
the reason they ran away from home.

Exercise 2
1
2

3

4

5
6
7
8

from p. 54

If you want to splash out on a new bike at the end of the year,
you’ll have to start putting a few quid aside each week.
I wanted to put forward the idea that we ought to either take
on some more staff members or put off the deadline for the
completion of the project.
Last night, there was a fire in the warehouse and the entire
building burnt down. For several hours the fireman were
unable to put out the blaze. They put the cause of the fire
down to an electrical fault.
I’m going to Chester and my sister has offered to put me up
for a night, but I didn’t really want to impose on her family. I
feel like I’d be putting them out.
I don’t know how you put up with his behaviour; he’s always
messing around and lashing out at the other children.
If you don’t mind waiting, we can put you through in 20
minutes. Or, you can call back in half an hour.
My wife will have steak and please, put me down for the fish.
He was throwing pieces of paper at the teacher while she was
writing on the board. However, when the teacher turned round
and caught him red handed, he claimed that his friend had put
him up to it. The teacher decided to punish them both.

2
3
4
5
6

from p. 57

I cringe every time I see his parents running around after him.
They are bringing up a monster!
As you can see, I let my imagination run away with me for
this poem.
She ran up to me, brimming with enthusiasm and grinning
from ear to ear.
The police ran after the pickpocket, but they couldn’t catch up
with him.
He ran away from home after his dad had a go at him, but
came back a few days later.
If we keep on buying all this pricey food and drink, we are
going to run up a huge bill.

Exercise 3

from p. 60

Unfortunately, on the way back we ran up against several
obstacles. Firstly, we ran out of petrol on the motorway, so I had
to run up to the nearest petrol station and buy some more. Next, I
filled the tank up with petrol, but my new car runs on diesel, and
this had slipped my mind when I was in the petrol station. So,
when I tried to start the car, the fuel system got clogged up with
the wrong fuel. I had to call out the repair service once again. I ran
through so much money just trying to sort out my car; in future, I
will jump on my bike instead.

Exercise 4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

from p. 60

In the meeting, we ran through all the details of next month’s
project.
I came down with flu at the beginning of February and this left
me feeling run-down for a few weeks.
Before you publish the book, run some of the ideas by/past
your audience to see if the book is likely to go down well.
Hilary Clinton ran against Donald Trump in the last US
election.
I ran into an old school mate while I was heading into town.
Her mother is always running her down; she needs to learn to
stand up for herself.
I forgot to turn off the headlights so the batteries have run
down.
He came into a fortune when his uncle died, but he ran
through it all in a matter of months, splashing out on all sorts
of exorbitant treats, indulging himself with the finest food and
drink, and living in the lap of luxury.

RUN Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 57

I often dream about packing in my job. The main duties are
running off hundreds of photocopies, running back and forth
Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

300

SET Phrasal Verbs

3
4

Exercise 1

from p. 63

The following document sets out/forth all the terms and
conditions of the loan. You’ll be expected to pay it off over a
series of monthly instalments, so please set up a direct debit with
your bank. Should you fall behind with your repayments, the
penalties for doing so are also clearly set forth/out in the
document. If you are planning to spend the loan on business
equipment, please remember that such purchases can be set off
against tax. What sets us apart from the other short-term-loan
providers is that we guarantee the lowest interest rates on the
market.

Exercise 2
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

from p. 64

Creeping through the undergrowth, the soldier unwittingly
tripped over a wire, setting off a bomb that blew him to
smithereens.
Winter will be setting in soon, so we ought to find shelter from
the elements.
My last computer set me back 500 quid.
The police tried to set the suspect up by planting a gun in his
pocket.
Her skilful use of poetic language sets her apart from the
other members of the debating society.
He set out to become the best lawyer in the business, but he
soon discovered that his oratory skills weren’t up to it.
I set about washing the dishes and tidying up as I knew my
auntie was going to pop round.
When I came back to the UK, I decided to set up an online
business so that I could work for myself and work from home.

5
6
7

8

Exercise 3

Exercise 4
1

3
4

Exercise 1

from p. 66

I enjoy reading and listening to UK and US media online; not only
do they keep me abreast of what’s happening around the world,
but they also enable me to keep up with the other students in my
English-language classes. At the moment, news sources keep on
about the recent boxing match that ended when one boxer didn’t
keep his guard up, so he was knocked out in the first round. He
landed up in a coma, with the doctors not knowing if he’d ever
come round. The press have been kept out of the hospital, so there
have been no photos in the newspapers.

Exercise 2
1

from p. 67

I can let you in on a little secret, but you must keep it to
yourself.
2 Over the last few weeks your English has really come on. If
you keep to a routine of about three hours a week, you’ll be
ready for the exam.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 69

A fight broke out at a cafe yesterday involving two footballers and
a civil servant. CCTV Footage shows that the official was
gobbling up his fry-up when the two men and their friends flooded
into the cafe, swearing, shouting, and acting aggressively. Their
behaviour was keeping the civil servant from enjoying his meal,
so he walked over to their table and politely asked them to keep
the noise down. However, he should have kept out of it, for the
footballers’ response was brutal. They lashed out at him with
punches and kicks, even throwing chairs and tables at him. The
footballers’ friends tried to keep the angry young men back, but to
no avail. The victim passed out in the attack and is currently
recovering in hospital. The doctors think he is likely to pull
through, though he may require a wheelchair.

2

KEEP Phrasal Verbs

The project looked like it would never be completed, but I
kept at it, finishing it off at two in the morning.
The neighbours were having a party, and the music was
blasting out till the early hours. Eventually the party died
down, but the noise had kept me up for half the night.
My mum keeps on at me about clearing up the mess in my
room, so I ought to put my stuff away first.
I think current geopolitical events will keep up the price of oil
and shore up the value of the currency.
Keep to a regular schedule, keep at the exercises, keep up the
effort, and you are sure to get through the exam. You might
even sail through it.
If you only just scrape through the exam, you may find it
difficult to keep up with the other students on this course.

5

6

from p. 70

To avoid putting on weight, it’s necessary to keep off certain
types of food and drink.
The pupil had been playing up all lesson, so his teacher
decided to keep him in for the lunch break.
The church bells were pealing out, and they were keeping me
from finishing an excellent book.
The detective could tell that the suspect was keeping
something from him; he needed to employ a method that
would drag the truth out of him.
If a fight breaks out, you ought to keep out of it. Getting
mixed up in these battles is the worst thing you can do. If you
are threatened, try to keep it together and walk away.
He regularly drops by his auntie’s house as he is doing his best
to keep in with that side of the family. He thinks that he may
come into their money one day.

GO Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 73

Last night, I heard fireworks going off, so I went out to see what
was going on. I could hear music belting out from my neighbours
garden, and when I peered over the fence, I saw they were having

301

a bonfire party. This surprised me as it was chucking it down, and
all the guests were soaked through. The host, who was setting off
fireworks, must have decided to go ahead/through with the party
in spite of the rain. The party went on for another 3 or 4 hours
before people started to head back home.

Exercise 2
1
2
3
4
5
6

7
8

from p. 73

Moving home can be a very difficult experience to go
through.
The fire went on burning for another half an hour, but
eventually it went out.
When I was growing up, I had my hair tied back in a pony tail,
and my dad would go on at me about getting my hair cut.
I don’t think I could go without my mobile nowadays. I can’t
sort anything out without it.
I’m not sure that we should go ahead with this plan. There are
many things that could go wrong.
Having run through the requirements, and having briefly run
them past my superiors, I am pleased to say we shall go ahead
with the project.
Your tie goes with the colour of your eyes. You look good
when you dress up.
When she got pregnant, her diet changed and she craved for
new foods. However, she went off chocolate and cakes.

Exercise 3

1
2
3
4
5
6

from p. 80

If I could turn back the clock, I would probably go back to when I
was 21 years old, just before I had that accident and landed myself
in hospital. My car had veered off the road and completely turned
over so that I was upside down when the fire service arrived. I
was so seriously injured that I had to remain in hospital for 2
weeks. Word soon got around that I had been drinking before the
accident, and many of my former friends turned on/against me. I
turned up at my best friend’s doorstep once I had got over my
injuries, but he simply turned me away, refusing to even speak to
me.

Exercise 2
1
2
3
4
5

6

7
8

from p. 80

If you knew that your friend was getting up to all sorts of
serious crimes, would you turn him in?
That factory has been turning out aircraft since the 1950s.
Don’t worry if you can’t find your keys. I am sure they will
turn up somewhere when you settle down.
We got to the nightclub at 12:30, but we were turned away.
Apparently they stop letting people in after midnight.
I heard a faint voice calling, but I couldn’t make out what was
being said. On turning round, I saw that it was an old friend
that I hadn’t bumped into in ages.
He usually turned to his uncle if he needed help, so he asked
his uncle to put him up, and his uncle agreed. A few days later,
his uncle got fed up with his bad habits, and turned him out in
the middle of the night.
The police were rummaging through his belongings, but they
didn’t turn up any incriminating evidence.
She had really knuckled down in order to pass the test,
brushing up on all aspects of the course. The exam turned out
to be really easy, so she sailed through it, passing with flying
colours.

from p. 76

My name is Felix, but on YouTube I go by the handle
‘PewDiePie’.
Jack the Ripper went down in history as the world’s first serial
killer.
If you keep going back on your promises, nobody will take
you seriously.
I thought that the food at the party went down really well with
the guests.
If you keep going back over these phrasal verbs, they will
start to sink in.
I don’t like him as he often goes around boasting about how
great he is. He comes across as arrogant and stuck-up.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

Exercise 1

from p. 76

I don’t really want to go into the details, but three young men
went after my cousin, and one of them was armed with a knife.
My cousin managed to fend them off, using his briefcase as a
make-do shield. There are often youngsters in that area who go
around looking for a fight, so this event came as no surprise to
me. The police actually managed to catch up with the attackers on
that same night, and it looks as though the armed attacker could go
down for 6 months or even a year. Personally, I think the judge
ought to send him down for even longer.

Exercise 4

TURN Phrasal Verbs

BRING Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 84

Members of parliament have been asked to mull over the
consequences of bringing in a 35-hour working week. During the
discussion, which has been brought forward to Friday the 28th so
as not to clash with other debates, the Liberal Democrats hope to
bring round MPs from the Labour Party. However, they will need
to proceed cautiously, or else several members of their own party
may turn against them. Several politicians have pointed out that
such legislation would bring about massive changes, that the
legislation would need to be phased in over a long period, and that
this new bill would be unlikely to get through the House of Lords.
In summary, it remains doubtful that the Liberal Democrats will
be able to bring this off.

302

Exercise 2
1
2

3
4
5
6
7

8

from p. 84

Both my parents passed away while I was still young; my
grandparents brought me up.
The downsizing of several large firms has sparked off a wave
of redundancies, bringing about a spike in the unemployment
figures.
He has cheered up since he started going out with her; she
brings out the very best in him.
Conspirators attempted to blow up parliament, thereby
bringing down King James and the Church of England.
The smell of paint always brings me back to my childhood; I
have been into painting for as long as I can remember.
The referee decided that the player had dived, so he didn’t
give a free kick, but I’m sure that the man was brought down.
I have already brought up the idea of splashing out on a new
car several times, but she’d rather put the money aside for a
second holiday; it’s going to be really difficult to bring her
round.
Some politicians have even put forward the idea of bringing
back capital punishment, but it is unlikely they will win over
their peers on this issue.

PLAY Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

My football team were scheduled to play away last Saturday, and
we managed to see off our opponents with a 3–0 win. We played
on their lack of height, feeding the midfield and attack with high
balls. We also played to our main strength, which was our greater
stamina. Nonetheless, I’m not sure what the referee was playing
at; firstly, he missed two handballs in the penalty area. Secondly, I
was clearly brought down unfairly by one of the opponents, but
the referee didn’t even pull out a yellow card. Still, we played
along with the referee’s decisions, and we were delighted with the
final result. However, my leg has been playing up all week, so I’m
going to see about arranging a doctor’s appointment tomorrow.

Exercise 2
1

2

3

SEE Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 87

We decided to see the New Year in for a change, so we bought in
loads of food and drink and rang up everyone that we knew to
invite them over for the party. We bought 20 bottles of Champagne
and 2 crates of beer, but I wasn’t sure that the beer would see us
through the whole night. So, I called a couple of mates and asked
them to stock up on beers on their way round to our place. During
the party, I saw to all the guests, topping up their glasses and
passing round the nibbles. My wife saw to the younger kids,
sorting out party games, unwrapping presents and putting on new
music.

Exercise 2
1

2
3

4

5

6

4

5

6
7
8

from p. 91

The situation was incredibly hard to predict; no one could see
beyond the next five minutes, so no one knew how things
would play out.
What the hell are you playing at? If you keep playing around
with that gun, it might go off by accident, seriously injuring or
even killing someone.
I thought that he was talking absolute rubbish, so I was
tempted to chime in with my own opinions, but in the end I
kept my mouth shut and played along with what he claimed. It
seemed a lot more fun this way.
My chess opponent was playing me for a fool, so I made a
decisive move that alerted him to the fact that he had already
lost the game.
Several politicians have been playing down the government’s
failure to reach its targets, arguing that these targets were
unrealistic in the first place.
Children will always attempt to play their father off against
their mother; corruption begins at a very early age.
She’s been playing up to the boss for at least a month. I think
she is going to be rewarded with a promotion.
Who’s been playing around with my laptop? Someone has
fiddled around with it, so all the settings are different.

from p. 87

Not only is he full of himself, but also he’s insincere. I don’t
know what she sees in him. I imagine, and hope, that they’ll
break up soon.
I’ll have to see about getting the boiler repaired as it’s getting
colder, and we can’t go without the central heating in October.
I fell behind with a lot of coursework in my last year of
university, but eventually I managed to see it through. The
thought of dropping out was horrifying, and it spurred me on.
Scrolling up, I noticed that the email asking for my bank
account details was from a strange email address. These
phishing scams are pretty easy to see through, but also pretty
easy to fall for.
He’s convinced that she is head-over-heels in love with him.
He needs to see through her lies. He can’t see anything
beyond her pretty face.
I saw the guests in at 8 o clock and saw them out at 11.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 90

DRAW Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 93

The sun had already gone down, the night was drawing in, and
Detective O Connor was drawing up a list of suspects. Having
drawn up a chair, he sat down and started to narrow down the list
by considering their alibis. Not one of the suspects had a
watertight alibi, so he could see that this case was likely to drag on
for longer than expected. It seemed likely that he would need to
draw on all those precious skills he had picked up over the years.
Firstly, he needed to draw in a number of credible witnesses, and
then he might be able to drag the truth out of one of them.

303

Exercise 2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

from p. 94

I wish my boss wouldn’t draw the meetings out for 1 hour. We
could sort everything out in 15 minutes if we wanted to.
The festival usually draws in about 50 000 people.
Is that your taxi? A car has just drawn up outside.
The proton is always drawn towards the electron on account
of its electric charge.
Are you sure that he has calmed down? I don’t want to be
drawn into another pointless argument.
He’s an incredibly shy teenager. I think he will open up if we
draw him out of his shell.
We need to draw up a rough draft of the plans, or else they
will have no idea of the schedule that we are working to.
Once you have drawn off the excess water, you will be left
with the white precipitate of silver bromide.

CALL Phrasal Verbs

HOLD Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

The prosecution lawyer set forth the main reasons for doubting the
veracity of the defendant’s assertions. Firstly, his alibi didn’t hold
up; several witnesses had seen him in the vicinity of the bank
close to the time of the robbery. Secondly, the defendant seemed to
be holding something back when he was asked about the current
whereabouts of his vehicle. It was certainly suspicious that his
vehicle had vanished on the same day that the robbers had held up
the bank. Lastly, the prosecution argued that the defendant was a
man who had been unable to hold down a job for some time;
therefore, he needed the money and had very little to lose. The
defence team had been holding out for an acquittal, but the
prosecution won over the jury; the defendant was sent down for 4
years.

Exercise 2
1

Exercise 1

from p. 96

The smell of paint has always called up memories of childhood,
and I put this down to the fact that my parents would paint our
fence every summer, so the whole garden reeked of the stuff.
Yesterday, my mother called in on me, wanting to call in a favour;
she had been looking after the kids most evenings, so I couldn’t
turn her down. She told me that her fence was in terrible
condition, and the situation called for urgent action. I went
straight over to her house, grabbed the paint and brush from the
shed, and applied myself in earnest. While I was finishing off the
last few panels, my mother went over all that I had done, calling
me out on every spot that I had missed.

Exercise 2
1
2
3
4
5

6

7
8

from p. 97

His behaviour was totally unacceptable, so a number of MPs
have called for the minister to step down.
The film is powerful and calls forth a number of intense
emotions in the audience, such as anger and fear.
This train calls at a number of stations, including West Ham
and Barking.
Call up the main menu and click on ‘settings’.
Last night, she let us all in on a little secret: she’s pregnant!
Such news obviously called for a celebration, so I popped to
the supermarket to buy some champagne.
The Prime Minister has called on the European Union to
carefully consider the stipulations laid out in the trade
agreement.
The pitch was soaked through, so the referee had to call off the
match.
The survivors of the crash had to call on all their strength to
make it through the harsh conditions of the freezing
mountains. That they managed to hold out for so many weeks
demonstrates that courage must have won out over
desperation.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 100

2

3
4

5

6

7

8

from p. 100

I heard that your brother got out of hospital last week. How is
he holding up?
The onset of winter and the freezing cold temperatures held
back the next stage of construction for 3 months, but we hope
to make up for lost time in the summer months.
I held out my arm for the bus, but the driver didn’t pull over;
he just drove past me without even looking at me.
I had so much anger bottled up inside of me, but I had to hold
myself back and smile at the customer while I dealt with his
complaint.
The teacher keeps on crossing out my correct answers and
marking down my work; I think he must hold something
against me.
The match was about to start when the heavens opened, and it
began to pelt down with rain. The weather held off play for
another 45 minutes.
I almost burst out laughing when he let me in on the rumour
that had been going around. Fortunately, I managed to hold it
in, as I’m sure my laughter would have got on his nerves.
We’ve been holding up our end of the bargain, and if you
don’t hold up your end, we will simply call off the whole
project.

LAY Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 103

Having graduated from university, I set out to find gainful
employment; my parents had made it very clear that I wouldn’t be
laying about the house all day. They had laid down a number of
ground rules which I had to abide by while living under their roof.
Luckily, a local firm took me on as a copywriter, so I was able to
lay some money aside each month for the rent and a little for
myself. Eventually, I managed to save up enough to put down a
deposit on my first flat. My parents were happy to see I had landed

304

on my feet, and even happier to see that I was moving out; in fact,
they laid on a feast to celebrate the fact that I had bought my first
home.

LET Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

Exercise 2
1
2

3
4
5
6
7
8

from p. 104

He has been laid up in bed since he came down with flu a few
days ago. He’ll be over it tomorrow or the next day.
The newlyweds had laid on a huge buffet for the guests, so
everyone was piling food onto their plates and filling up their
glasses in readiness for the toast.
We had a very short layover in Geneva, but then we got back
on the plane and took off.
The newspaper laid into the footballer, pointing out that his
marriage had broken down because of his alcoholism.
The terms and conditions are laid out in the contract, so please
go through this document carefully.
He’ll be laying his job on the line if he doesn’t carry out the
instructions of management to the letter.
I have been trying to lay hold of an old book that I first read as
a youngster, but which has gone out of print.
The factory had to lay off another 50 employees, as several
parts of the business are being hived off.

BEAR Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

Please, bear with me while I relate this story as I do tend to drone
on, and bear in mind that these events happened a long time ago.
The testimonies of my brothers and sisters will bear out what I
have said. During childhood, I was kicked out of school for
bunking off classes. I used to head down to the park at lunch time,
and then not go back for the afternoon classes. One day, while I
was messing around in the park, I suddenly caught a glimpse of
the headmaster in the corner of my eye. He was bearing down on
me so quickly that even running away was not an option. I was
swiftly given a good ticking off and then told that I shouldn’t
bother coming into school the next day.

Exercise 2
1
2

3
4
5

6

Last night was bonfire night, and we decided to have a party and
let off some fireworks. Unfortunately, it was chucking it down at
7:00 pm, so we held off for an hour. A couple of guests who said
they would come let us down as they never showed up; I think the
bad weather put them off. However, the rain let up at 8:00 pm, so
we all went outside to watch the display. I had only bothered
buying rockets because I can’t stand the little fireworks that fizzle
out in a few seconds, not even letting out a large bang!
Nonetheless, I didn’t know what I had let my guests in for when I
bought these rockets. Without doubt, they were the loudest and
brightest that I had ever bought.

Exercise 2
1

2

3

from p. 106

from p. 107

There is compelling evidence that bears out his alibi. Perhaps
he should be released from custody.
While he was running across the main road, he was run over
by a jeep. He is still bearing up in hospital, but doctors expect
him to make a full recovery.
The police could find no evidence bearing on his
disappearance. It was a most perplexing mystery.
If you bear off at the next junction, you should come up to a
roundabout. Turn off at the third exit.
Bear in mind that the judge let him off with a suspended
sentence the last time he was in court. This time the judge will
come down very heavily on the defendant.
Please bear with us for 5 minutes while we call up your details
on our computer.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 109

4

5

6

from p. 110

The police have been interrogating the suspect for 3 hours,
attempting to wring the truth out of him, but he still hasn’t let
on.
In the first year of his teaching career, he spent most of the
working day shouting at the pupils, coming down heavily on
all forms of misbehaviour. This year he has let up on his
students, realising that a soft approach can be more productive
than a severe one.
He was accused of having stolen thousands of pounds;
therefore, he was expected to go down for a number of years.
However, the judge let him off with a suspended sentence.
The students had no idea what they were letting themselves in
for when they coughed up £30 for a new text book. However,
when the new vocabulary started to sink in, they realised that
they hadn’t frittered away the money on nothing.
I asked the pupil to hand in the essay by the end of the week,
but instead he just fobbed me off with a lame excuse. I put off
the deadline for a few more days, hoping that this would give
him the chance to finish off the coursework, but he still let me
down.
She promised to let me in on her secret providing that I not
blurt it out to any of my brothers and sisters.

WORK Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 112

I was reading that several scientists are working towards the
creation of a radio-optical telescope that will be located below sea
level. They have already worked out exactly where the site will be
located, and local media have reported that scientists from all over
the world will be working together on the project. The telescope
will be below sea level because the scientists are trying to work
around the problem of interference from the world’s oceans. It
has even been suggested that the cosmic microwave background
radiation could actually be a signal emitted by the Earth’s oceans,
and if this is the case, we would expect the new telescope not to

305

detect any such signal as it is located below sea level. Such
suggestions have worked theoretical physicists into a frenzy,
mainly because the detection of the cosmic background radiation
was the main evidence for the Big Bang. If the new telescope
discovers that the cosmic background signal doesn’t appear below
sea level, it appears that science will have to develop a new theory
for the beginning of the universe (if, indeed, it even has a
beginning).

Exercise 2
1
2
3
4
5

6

7
8

3

What’s wrong with Jake? He’s been down all week, and
yesterday I walked in on him when he was in tears.
4 I am after some AA batteries. Do you know where I could
find some?
5 The police have been after him since last November, but they
don’t seem to be able to track him down.
6 Allegations of tax evasion have been levelled against several
politicians, and it looks as though their relatives have also
been in on it.

from p. 113

I was working out in the gym for 3 hours, and it really helped
me to work up an appetite.
I spent 30 minutes on the exercise bike; I think I managed to
work off a lot of calories.
If you work at your pronunciation every day, singing songs
and reciting poetry, it is sure to gradually improve.
If you work through the exercise slowly, coming at each
problem patiently, you are sure to breeze through the test.
The minister’s comments were certainly politically incorrect,
perhaps even verging on racist and sexist. This is why the
newspapers were worked into a frenzy.
It is very difficult to do a somersault, but if you work up to it
on a trampoline, starting with a forward roll, moving on to a
jump and a roll, finishing with a jump, a roll and a landing,
you will manage to do it quite quickly.
He gets so worked-up whenever his brother winds him up; he
needs to chill out and spend more time with others.
He has been moaning about his job since he started, so I don’t
think it’s working out well. I suppose he’ll pack it in soon.

Exercise 3

I’m not well up on modern history, but I do enjoy reading about
ancient history. In particular, I’m into books that discuss the
ancient megalithic structures, their purpose, and their construction.
Some of the books claim that these ancient sites have nothing to
do with the burial of the dead, as I was taught at school. Many
researchers are out to prove their own theories, of course, and
some are rather sensible while others are far-fetched. The most
persuasive theory for me is the idea that many of these ancient
sites were observatories for watching the stars. I think those
people who put forward such ideas are onto something.

Exercise 4
1
2

3
4

BE Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

5

from p. 116

Yesterday, my kids asked over some of their friends for a small
party. Not all of their friends came, however, as a couple of them
were down with flu, so they didn’t feel up to coming along.
Nonetheless, 4 friends popped round, and when they arrived, they
told me they were after some bicarbonate of soda and shaving
cream as they were into making ‘slime’. I gave them what they
wanted, even though I thought it was a strange request. After an
hour or so, I noticed that they were being incredibly quiet.
Thinking that they must be up to something, I went up to see what
was going on. Opening the door, I couldn’t believe my eyes: there
was shaving foam all over the floor and baking soda all over the
bed. I told them that the mess was not on, so they would have to
tidy it up immediately.

Exercise 2

from p. 118

6

from p. 119

My dad was always on at me about getting my hair cut. He
couldn’t stand my long hair.
Tonight’s football game is off due to heavy rain. If we played,
we’d have to wade through the water; the whole pitch is
water-logged.
I forgot to put the milk back in the fridge, so when I tried
drinking it this morning, it had already gone off.
You’ll be in for a very difficult last year if you fail your
summer exams. You might even be forced to drop out of
university.
We’re out of sugar. Who is up for popping down the shops and
buying some more?
I’m sure the new boss is out to sack me. He keeps checking up
on me while I’m working, and I get the impression that he
doesn’t like me. He is after a good reason to let me go.

from p. 116

1

I don’t think I am cut out for working in a classroom. I don’t
like managing children’s behaviour, and I don’t think I am
good at it.
2 I don’t feel up to going in to work tomorrow. I’ll have to call
in sick.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

306

PHRASAL VERBS AND
MOVEMENT

Exercise 4
1
2
3

Exercise 1

from p. 122

Old age has a habit of creeping up on people. At first, you can’t
even make out the small grey hairs, but, in the end, your entire
scalp is crawling with grey hair. You start to lag behind others in
terms of current affairs and modern gadgets. You find yourself
doubling back to places you have already been as you have
forgotten something there. You notice you need to sit down more
often after small amounts of exercise. And, if you don’t take these
breaks, there’s a risk you might be keeling over rather than falling
over.

Exercise 2
1

2

3

4

5
6

7
8

5
6
7
8

Be careful! The tide is going out; sometimes people are swept
away by the strong currents.
10 000 football supporters flooded/piled/streamed into the
stadium, singing songs and waving flags.
It clouded over for a few hours, but eventually the sun came
out and we all popped down the beach.
He screwed up the junk mail and threw it away, not wanting
to find out what was in the envelope.
I stuck/held out my arm, hoping that a passing car might pull
over, but nobody wanted to give me a lift.
She always takes up far too much space on the sofa, so I have
to ask her to budge/move up.
When I saw the dentist pick up her drill, all the muscles in my
jaw tensed up.
The next few months will be very difficult as demand is low at
this time of year, but we will march/soldier/push on and do
our best.

from p. 122

When the President breezed into the room, we all
stood/stepped aside to allow him to sit down at the head of
the table.
The kidnapper must have crept/sneaked up on his victim,
pinned him down on the floor, tied up his arms, and then
thrown him into the boot of his car.
The police had cordoned off the scene of the crime, and one of
the police officers was ordering passers-by to back/move
away from the police cordon.
Our affair had been going on for months; we chose the
meeting room for a passionate kiss, but the boss suddenly
burst/barged/walked in on us and sacked us before we could
even say a word in our defence.
On hearing the punchline, I doubled over in fits of laughter.
Never in my life had I heard such a funny joke.
He is lagging/falling/dropping behind the other students. He
needs to buckle down, or he won’t get through the rest of the
course; he might even have to drop out and repeat the year.
Several policemen went/ran after the armed robber, and when
they caught up with him, there was a shoot-out.
When the pregnant woman got on the train, I
jumped/got/stood up and pointed at my seat.

Exercise 3

4

from p. 125

from p. 124

My new cat likes to curl up on a pillow on the sofa, now that we
are in the winter months. For some reason, whenever I walk past
her in the garden, she will always stretch out her front legs, and I
suppose it is a kind of greeting. If she is feeling particularly
cheerful, she may even roll over. However, most of the time she
seems to be in a bad mood, so my son has named her ‘grumpy
cat’. If you try to stroke her, her muscles tense up; her face
screws up; and she lets out a hiss. She is happiest of all in the
garden, especially when the sun has come out. She may be
grumpy, but we love her all the same.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

Exercise 5

from p. 127

Last week, as soon as the sun came up, I flung on my sports kit
and dashed off to play a game of rugby. Our opponents were top
of the league, but we managed to see them off by playing up to our
superior stamina and speed. I play on the wing, so when the ball is
thrown to me, I have to fly at the defenders, barging through their
biggest players. Our opponents were very unhappy to lose, and
one of their players was even sent off for throwing the ball at the
referee. The 90 minutes whizzed by, as we were enjoying the
game so much. After the game, we all breezed into the changing
rooms, pleased with our delightful result.

Exercise 6
1

2

3

4
5

6

7
8

from p. 127

I dashed down the corridor, tripped over the roller skate, and
fell down the stairs, winding up in hospital, where I remained
for 3 days.
Jumping out of his chair, he flew/came/ran at the intruder in a
rage, his face screwed up, his cheeks puffed out, and his eyes
bulging out.
Having got the promotion that she wanted, she breezed into
the office an hour after the rest of us had piled in, and sat there
grinning smugly.
Please, pull up a chair and push the window to if you are cold.
You are going to brush up on your phrasal verbs today.
The tide had gone out; the Moon had gone in; the noise of the
party was trailing off, and the sound of the crickets drowned
all the other noises out.
The thought of someone slowly creeping up on him sent
shivers down his spine; freezing up, he was unable to turn
round and face his demons. So, he just remained there on his
feet, staring into space.
The apple was a few centimetres from my fingers, so I
stretched out and pulled it off the tree.
The children were running around and messing about; the time
flew/flashed/whizzed by quickly for all the kids, but for
several adults the party really dragged on.

307

Exercise 7

from p. 130

Traffic is now tailing back 3 km on the M25 from junction 15,
because a lorry crashed into another vehicle, spilling its cargo all
over the motorway. Traffic is also building up on the M6; initial
reports suggested that a pedestrian may have been run over.
However, now there are conflicting reports that claim several
police cars closed in on a car containing 3 criminals, eventually
managing to force the driver to slow down and pull up in a lay-by.
As soon as they got out of the car, the 3 men were taken into
police custody for questioning.

Exercise 8
1

2
3

4

5
6

from p. 132

I had a nightmare journey yesterday; firstly, I decided to pop
down/to/into the supermarket to stock up on food for the kids’
party. However, when I got out of the supermarket, I saw that
another driver had blocked me in. I tried to reverse my car through
a small gap as I was in a hurry, but I managed to accidentally back
the car into a post. Having damaged my car, I ran out of petrol on
the way back home, so I was forced to double back and buy a can
of petrol from the supermarket. Once I had finally filled up with
petrol, I put the car into first gear and then the engine froze up. In
the end, I had to call out the vehicle repair service.

Exercise 10

I was almost out of water, so I pulled into a car park, got out
of the car, and dashed to a shop to buy some. The shop was
teeming with kids on a school trip, and by the time I got back
to my car, some idiot had blocked me in.
6 While backing into his drive, he ran over his neighbours dog.
Sadly, the animal was in so much pain that it had to be put
down.
7 At the next junction you need to bear/veer off this road, go
round the next roundabout, and take the third exit.
8 Having put the car into reverse, he backed up several metres
and knocked down a cyclist.

from p. 130

The road police flagged me down in the middle of the journey,
so I had to get out and show them my driving license. I also
had to breathe into a breathalyser.
I pulled up a chair and sat down, spreading out my legs and
stretching out my arms.
I asked my dad whether he would mind picking me up at
18:00. I was worried that if he turned up any later, he might
not drop me off in time for my flight.
A young child was knocked down at the traffic lights
yesterday. I think they should lower the speed limit on that
road.
My mother waved good bye to me as I got on the plane. Then,
I dozed off as soon as I sat down.
We ran away from the scene of the crime, but a policeman ran
after us; within a few minutes, he was already bearing down
on us.

Exercise 9

5

from p. 133

1

I pulled out onto the motorway. A black Mercedes overtook
me, cutting me up as it pulled into my lane. The Mercedes
sped away, but I went after him; when I was closing/ homing
in on him, a policeman pulled me over and gave me a
speeding fine.
2 Please, slow down! It’s raining, so you might skid off the road
and crash into the barrier.
3 Traffic has been building/piling up on the ring-road for the
last few hours, and now the cars are tailing back to the
intersection.
4 Driving out to the countryside would have been impossible
had I not first filled the car up with petrol; however, I still had
to jump start the car the next morning when the engine froze
up.
Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

UP Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 135

For the Christmas party, our boss booked a table for 20 at a nearby
Thai restaurant. I decided to dress up for the event, hoping to
make a good impression on some of my colleagues. The boss
picked me up at 7:00 as my house was on his way. He reeked of
aftershave and was all spruced up. It took about 20 minutes for
the staff to bring out all the food as we had ordered so many
dishes; nevertheless, the meal was delicious so we managed to eat
everything up. We must have run up a huge bill, but it didn’t
matter as the company had laid on all the food and drink, so we
didn’t have to cough up a penny.

Exercise 2
1
2
3

4
5
6

7
8

from p. 136

The price of oil has been going up over the last few days, but
it is expected to level out by the end of the week.
It was a big party, so she dolled herself up, putting on her best
evening dress and high-heeled shoes.
The military is beefing up its presence on the eastern borders,
with 5000 extra troops flooding into the area in the next few
weeks.
You’re taking up all the space on this sofa. Budge/Move up
and let someone else sit down.
I’ve been saving up for weeks, and finally I have enough
money to splash out on a new bike.
In my first year of university, I chilled out too much. By the
second year I couldn’t keep up with the other students on my
course, and I dropped out at the end of that year.
We’re doing up the flat next week; we’ll be ripping out the old
floor and putting in a new one.
If I don’t cough up another £100, the local council will be
taking me to court.

Exercise 3

from p. 139

The teacher told us that we would be wrapping up the lesson with
a little test, but we would have to think up the questions
ourselves. Each pupil had to think of a phrasal verb, while the
other students came up with yes and no questions to work out
which verb it was. No one was able to guess my phrasal verb, so
my classmates gave up in the end. My phrasal verb was ‘bring up’

308

which has two meanings: mention something and look after
someone until they are an adult. Lots of different verbs
came/cropped up in the lesson, so I think this is a good way to go
back over old material, learning it all by heart.

Exercise 4
1
2

3

4

5

6

7
8

from p. 142

I have always looked up to my older brother; he sailed through all
his exams, and then he was taken on by a prestigious company. In
contrast, I messed/mucked up all my exams and I wasn’t able to
hold down a job either. He never picked me up on my mistakes,
perhaps as he didn’t want to show me up. Instead, he had always
put up with my behaviour without complaint, not even going on at
our mum and dad when I was clearly living off their generosity.
Eventually, my parents funding, as well as their sympathy, dried
up; therefore, I had no choice but to find gainful employment.
Fortunately, an interesting job opportunity opened up, and I was
able to turn my life around.

Exercise 6
1
2
3
4

5
6

So far, the results of the experiment don’t seem to add up: on
the one hand, they show that light is a particle, but on the other
hand, they show that it’s a wave.
8 The class lined up in the playground when the fire alarm went
off.

from p. 139

I hate it when my brother uses all the toilet roll up without
putting out a new one for other members of the family.
He has a reputation for always turning/showing/rolling up
late. He’ll probably be along if we hang around for a few more
minutes.
If we don’t book up the trip soon, we’ll have to fork out a lot
more. And if we all go in on a taxi, that will also help bring
down the price.
I’m thinking of taking up badminton; it’s an inexpensive way
to keep in shape, and I have a few friends that I can pit myself
against.
2 muggers set on him while he was walking back, and they
beat him up so badly that he wound/ ended/landed/finished
up in hospital. I’ll drop by his ward tomorrow to cheer him
up.
If you didn’t like the proposed date, why didn’t you bring this
up at the meeting? It’s far too late to bring the date forward or
put the date back.
The police have been trying to pin the blame on my uncle, so
they set him up by planting evidence in his car.
I leafed through the text last night, and I thought that it was a
good piece of work, although spelling mistakes did crop up in
a few places.

Exercise 5

7

from p. 143

I don’t mind putting my nephew up, but whenever he stays he
clogs up the toilet with paper.
Funding for this project will soon dry up, so it’s important to
reel in some new investors.
His room is always cluttered up with clothes. Why doesn’t he
put them away instead of just throwing them on the floor?
Work started piling up a few weeks ago, and I have been
snowed under ever since. I need to book up a holiday and chill
out for a few weeks.
The accident really shook him up; he says he won’t get back
on a motorbike ever again.
His wife grassed him up; she turned him over to the
authorities when she found out that he’d been cheating on her.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

Exercise 7

from p. 145

Seeing her face one more time
conjured/stirred/called/summoned up memories of the first time
we had met: a group of classmates had surrounded her and were
winding her up. It looked as though a fight were about to flare up.
I was outraged at what they were up to, so I tried to stand up for
the poor girl by getting among them and squaring up to the
biggest bully. I managed to break them up before any punches
were thrown, and the bullies headed off home. She has looked up
to me as if I were her older brother ever since that moment.

Exercise 8
1
2
3
4

5
6

7

8

from p. 146

I took my kids out to a restaurant, and they behaved terribly,
showing me up in front of all my friends.
I think the teacher is excellent at maintaining discipline;
however, he is not very well up on his subject.
Please, go into the dining room and lay out all the knives and
forks. I will be dishing up your food in ten minutes.
The little boy owned up to throwing the piece of paper at the
teacher, but he made out that his schoolmate had put him up to
it.
I haven’t backed up any of this work for a long time, so I’d
better sort it out tonight otherwise I might lose the whole lot.
Have you seen all the new shops which are sprouting up on
the high street? We’ll have to visit them this weekend and look
around.
Peter loves winding up his brother until he breaks down in
tears. And his parents just let him get away with it, letting him
off rather than telling him off. It gets on my nerves!
We are going to sell up and move out once we have found a
nice overseas property.

Exercise 9

from p. 149

My class is made up of 30 pupils, and the majority of us are well
behaved. However, there is one boy, Simon, who regularly plays
up, winding up different teachers and turning up late for most
lessons. He gets on everyone’s nerves; his behaviour drags out the
lesson, puts off the teacher, and holds back the whole class.
Yesterday, my mobile phone went missing at break time, and I was
told that Simon had been fiddling around with my bag. Boiling
over with anger, I confronted him, but he wouldn’t own up to
rummaging through my belongings. Changing my strategy, I
decided to rifle through his bag while he wasn’t in the room.
Unsurprisingly, I fished my phone out straight away.

Exercise 10
1

from p. 149

I get on with most of my classmates, but there are a few pupils
who I can’t stand because they are always sucking up to the
teacher.

309

2
3

4
5
6
7
8

Most of the evidence was circumstantial, being unlikely to
hold up in a court of law.
You ought to let up on your son. If you were less harsh, he
would start to learn from his own mistakes and acquire a sense
of responsibility.
The rain has been coming down all day, so now I’m soaked
through. When do you think it will let up?
If you call up the main menu, you’ll be able to find the
settings icon.
My back has been playing up ever since I tried to carry that
heavy suitcase down those stairs.
Before breakfast, I like to work up an appetite by going for a
10km run.
He came down with a nasty infection, and the doctor says he
will be laid up for the rest of the week.

DOWN Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 152

As soon as we had saved up enough money, we decided to move
into a new house. The area where we lived was urban and rundown, but we wanted to settle down in a rural area with plenty of
space for the kids to run around. It was incredibly difficult to get
all of our stuff to the new place. We were stressed out and worn
down by the end of it. But it was worth it. The fresh air helped me
to cut down on a number of bad habits. And being far away from
the hustle and bustle of the city, the pace of life seemed to slow
down.

Exercise 2
1
2

3
4
5

6
7
8

from p. 153

He knelt down in front of me and begged for forgiveness.
These exams have been dumbed down so that everyone sails
through the test, and the good marks reflect well on the
teachers.
I hope the weather cools down a bit. I find this stifling heat
unbearable. I work up a sweat just sitting in my chair.
It was pouring down with rain, and the raindrops were
trickling/running down the window.
When information came to light regarding the minister’s
involvement in tax avoidance schemes, even his closest allies
called for him to step/stand down.
Every time time you get in a car, you put your foot down. If
you don’t slow down, you’re going to run someone over.
The roar of the applause died down, and the performer bent
forwards to take one last bow.
Shhh! This is a library; if you don’t quieten/pipe down, you’ll
be thrown out.

Exercise 3

from p. 156

Unfortunately, it looks as though our suppliers have let us down
again. They promised to deliver the goods last week, but then they
fobbed us off at the last minute with a lame excuse: they claimed
their driver had come down with a nasty infection. However, I am

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

certain that they have drivers standing by that are ready to fill in
for anyone that might fall ill. In my opinion, their tardiness comes
down to a lack of organizational skills among the management.
Nonetheless, others put it down to machinery breaking down at
the factory.

Exercise 4

from p. 156

1

Sherlock discovered evidence at the crime scene that enabled
him to narrow down the list of potential suspects.
2 I always keep a notepad handy as I like to jot down any new
ideas that I might come up with.
3 Engineers are trying to pin down the cause of the power
outage.
4 The authorities ought to clamp down on the big businesses
that are guilty of tax evasion. Amazon, Facebook, and Google
seem to get away with paying barely any tax.
5 I’ve been looking into my family tree recently, so I’m trying to
track down several distant relatives who may be able help me.
6 Even if they offer me the job, I reckon I’ll turn them down.
7 The government subsidies that were shoring up the industry
have now been withdrawn, and it seems likely that several
businesses will be permanently shut down.
8 The former government was brought down 6 months ago in a
series of violent uprisings that left hundreds dead.
9 The sentence handed down by the judge was so lenient; many
journalists wrote that the offender had virtually been
exonerated.
10 He has a brother who is slightly older than he is, so we often
hand down the clothes, saving a lot of money in the process.

Exercise 5

from p. 159

It had been pouring/tipping down all day. With rain
trickling/running down the windowpane, I was thumbing
through the newspaper, my eyes darting from one article to the
next. The headline that caught my eye was ‘government accused
of watering down new trade agreement’. The article explained
that MPs had originally set out to collect higher import taxes on
goods arriving from outside the EU, but pressure from business
meant that Westminster had to climb down so that the rate of tax
remains largely unchanged. A number of politicians attempted to
play down the changes in the agreement, pointing out that the
agreement would still go down in history as a turning point in
international relations.

Exercise 6
1
2
3
4
5
6

from p. 159

Scrolling down the webpage, I noticed several glaring errors
that would have to be corrected.
If we don’t buckle down soon, we’re going to miss the
deadline; we’ll be slaving away on both projects next week.
The battle went down in history as the largest tank battle since
World War Two.
The council has refused to back down on their plans to turn
parts of the forest into residential housing.
Success boils/comes down to effort rather than luck.
Once the children had simmered down, the teacher handed
out the worksheets.

310

I had to haggle with the taxi driver, and he knocked down the
price. In the end, everyone had to chip in 10 euros, so it wasn’t
too expensive.
8 If you’re going to get a take-away, put me down for a quarter
pounder and chips.

Exercise 4

IN Phrasal Verbs

3
4

7

1

2

from p. 162

5

Some friends and I decided to sort out a surprise party for a friend.
There were 10 of us that agreed to go in on the cost of laying on
the food and hiring out the venue. In the end, we each chipped in
50 quid, and we were very happy with what we got in return; the
food was delicious and plentiful, the venue was spacious and
clean, and the atmosphere was warm and cosy. Unfortunately,
someone called in on the birthday boy the day before the party
and let him in on our little secret, so the party came as no surprise.

6

Exercise 1

Exercise 2
1

2

3

4
5

6

7
8

from p. 163

Noticing that the police were homing in on them, the driver
put his foot down and drove into the fast lane; however, the
police were still gaining on them.
I ran/bumped into an old mate while walking along the beach
yesterday. Seeing his familiar countenance brought back
memories of my childhood.
Starting classes in a new school was very difficult, and he had
problems fitting in. He ended up befriending a number of kids
from his chess club, and after a few months, he had
completely settled in.
It always takes time and effort for new vocabulary to sink in,
so please keep using these words over and over again.
Some kids were colouring in their pictures, while others were
putting away their toys. One or two had already finished both
of these tasks, and they were sitting up with their arms
crossed, waiting to be let out.
If you have already tried turning it off and on again, and still
the screen remains black, please check that you have plugged
it in.
As an asthmatic, he has difficulty breathing in and out when
he gets nervous.
Please fill in this form; write down your full name and
address.

Exercise 3

from p. 166

The 22nd century will usher in a new epoch of the
decentralization of currency. New legislation will be phased in
that will do away with national currencies, leaving only
cryptocurrencies as viable payment methods. Those who bought
up Bitcoin and Ethereum in the early days will be raking it in.
The rally will reel in all sorts of other investors, and step by step
everyone will be roped into the new payment system.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

7

8

from p. 166

I will pencil you in on the 22nd of September, but if you need
to call off the lesson or bring it forward, just write me an email
and give me a heads-up.
Having heard about Bitcoin, he decided to cash in on the rally,
and he put all of his savings into it. One year later, he sold off
all his cryptocurrency, raking in about 1 million dollars in
profit.
The best way to reel in new customers is to advertise online.
We don’t have enough players for our football match tonight,
so do you think we could rope your brother in?
His salary hadn’t gone up for almost 7 years, so he ended up
packing his job in.
If the whole family pitches in, we’ll be able to put everything
away and tidy everything up in half an hour.
Whenever he loses the game of cards, his older sister loves to
rub it in. She really ought to have grown out of this childish
behaviour by now.
I have always worn bright colours. I prefer not to blend in, but
to stand out.

Exercise 5

from p. 168

What would you do if your cousin were picking on younger kids,
beating them up, and doing them out of money? That’s the
dilemma that I came up against. He fell in with a bad crowd last
year, and ever since that moment he’s been getting away with
murder. Last week, I decided to anonymously turn him in by
sending one of our teachers a video of him lashing out at some of
the younger kids. He’ll be in for some severe punishment as his
behaviour was cruel and nasty. I hope that it will help him reflect
on his behaviour and rein in some of his wild impulses.

Exercise 6
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

from p. 169

If you factor in all the expenses of setting up this kind of
business, you’ll see that it is far less profitable than it looks at
first glance.
The pipes are likely to freeze up when the winter sets in, and
then we’ll definitely have to call in a plumber.
When I’ve been waiting in a queue for a long time and
someone pushes in, I find it hard rein back my anger.
The boss has had it in for me ever since I turned up slightly
late for 3 meetings in a row.
He has been under her thumb since they started going out with
each other, and he caves in to all of her demands.
I usually turn in just before midnight, but I get up at half past
seven.
He has a nasty habit of butting in whenever I open my mouth.
I let the cat in every morning, and she always wolfs down her
breakfast.

311

OUT Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

5

from p. 172

Panic broke out in the markets yesterday when the government
announced they would not be bailing out two of the oldest and
most reputable city banks. The liabilities of the banks will be
shared out among the largest creditors. There are concerns that
the economy could now seize up as a result of the closing down of
payment systems. Creditors have already begun queueing up
outside the banks, in fear of losing their savings. The CEOs of the
aforementioned banks claim that the government has frozen/ cut
them out of ongoing discussions, making it impossible for them to
offer any solutions to the crisis.

Exercise 2
1
2

3
4
5
6
7

8

from p. 172

Having been on my feet all day, I was completely worn/tired/
knackered out.
Discipline is important in the laboratory; if anyone starts
mucking around during the experiment, they will be
immediately booted/kicked out.
If we farm out some of the work to software companies in
Asia, costs will be drastically reduced.
He fished/took his passport out of his pocket, and handed it
over to the customs official.
I showed/saw out the last few guests, tidied up some of the
mess, and locked up all the doors and windows.
The thief let out a scream when he fell off the fence and
landed on his back.
I enjoy eating out, but I prefer sending out for something
delicious, and then chilling out at home with some food and a
computer game.
Having broken out of his cell, the convict now had to pit
himself against three one-metre thick, three-metre high, stone
walls.

Exercise 3

from p. 175

When I glanced through the document, I saw that it set out the
terms and conditions of my mortgage, and I was quickly able to
figure out how much interest I would have to pay back each
month. I decided to drag out the repayment process to the
maximum term of 30 years. Interest rates had bottomed out
recently, so monthly repayments were fairly low, and they were
likely to flatten out rather than shoot up.

Exercise 4

from p. 175

1

We’ve run out of ketchup, so I’ll pop down the shops and pick
some up.
2 Jutting/Sticking out with flags draped over them, the
balconies were crammed with people celebrating the folk
festival.
3 It seems likely that many species died out during this era due
to a cataclysmic event.
4 We used to keep the tomato ketchup bottle upside down in
order to eke it out for a few more days.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

The minister has spoken out against the misuse of public
funds, and he fully intends to bring this issue up during the
next parliamentary hearing.
6 They slave away at the office during the day, but after work
they enjoy zoning out in front of the TV.
7 Having drunk too much at the party, he blurted out how he
really felt in front of everybody, and he undoubtedly regrets it
now.
8 I laid out the knives and forks while my wife dished up the
dinner.

Exercise 5

from p. 178

Wedding bells were pealing out as crowds of guests flooded into
the church hall, nattering away to their spouses and children, the
noise of the conversations drowned out only by the incessant
ringing. After a few minutes the commotion fizzled out, and a
young priest jumped up to take his position behind the lectern. His
voice, booming out to all corners of the grandiose hall, was soft,
low and enthusiastic. He singled out love as the most sacred of
Christian virtues, and as his voice petered out, the congregation
were left with his poignant words ringing in their heads.

Exercise 6
1
2
3

4

5

6

7

8

from p. 179

She hung all the clothes up on the washing line, and one hour
later they had all dried out.
Scientists claim there is a mountain of evidence that the
dinosaurs were wiped out by a meteorite.
The meeting dragged on for one more hour as we tried to
thrash out an effective marketing strategy for the upcoming
quarter.
I’d like to single him out as the most industrious pupil in the
class. No matter how difficult the problem is, he will buckle
down until he has figured/worked out the answer.
Pundits expect the price of oil to level/flatten out for at least
another 2 or 3 weeks. But then they expect the price to rally,
and we could see it shoot up to 1500 dollars per ounce.
He pulled out of the fight the day before the boxing match
was supposed to have taken place, so the bookmakers had to
call off all the bets.
The restaurant was packed out with customers at 6:00, but by
7:00 the crowd had started to thin out as everyone was
heading down to the beach for the firework display.
We still have a few minor difficulties to iron out, but we
expect to roll out the new product by the end of this month.

Exercise 7

from p. 182

As an English teacher, it is my duty to call students out on their
mistakes. When I first started teaching, I picked them up on every
mistake, but this strategy didn’t pan/ turn out as expected; some
students began to fear their own mistakes and clam up. So, to
draw the students out of their shells, it’s necessary to turn a blind
eye to the minor errors and to focus only on the major mistakes.
Using this method, the teacher will soon be listening to his student
churning out loads of complex sentences with very few blunders.

312

Exercise 8
1
2

3
4
5

6
7

8

from p. 182

I went to the casino last night, and they cleaned me out. I left
with nothing but the shirt on my back.
The kitchen was done out in blue and white tiles with solid
oak flooring. It must have set the owners back at least 10
grand.
By the age of 15, I had grown out of TV programs. They all
seemed hopelessly childish and intellectually barren.
Every time she walks into the room, you zone out as if you
were in some kind of trance. You need to snap out of it.
I became a proof reader for a few weeks, but I quickly realised
that I wasn’t cut out for the job. It was far too boring with
very little contact with other people.
The city centre is always packed out with tourists at this time
of year. Let’s go somewhere else.
The factory still turns out 10000 cars every year, but they are
going to cut back on staff next month, and this will reduce
their output.
If your answer is wrong, cross it out neatly and write down the
correct answer next to it.

Exercise 9

from p. 185

The detective eyed the prime suspect with cautious reservation.
Out of all the witnesses that the police had spoken to, not one
piece of testimony bore out the alibi that this suspect had been
sticking to. It was the detective’s job to wring the truth out of the
suspect under interrogation, but he was failing miserably. The
suspect was calm and self-composed, delighted that the police
were unable to fathom out his precise location at the time of the
murder. He had made out that he was sitting in his car, leafing
through the newspaper, whereas in reality he had been inside the
victim’s house, slipping poison into his dinner.

Exercise 10
1

2

3
4

5
6
7
8

from p. 186

Arsenal are holding out for a win or a draw against Chelsea,
as either of these results will see them move into the next
round of the FA cup.
His 2-year-old child broke out in a rash a few weeks ago; it
seems to have been some kind of allergic reaction to the
washing powder that his parents have been using.
She makes her husband out to be an expert, but in reality he
knows nothing about investment.
It was such a difficult test that I ran out of time. I couldn’t
fathom/figure/work out the answer to one of the questions on
the last page.
The interrogator knew that he could use subtle threats in order
to root/ferret out the information that he needed.
After a bombing campaign that dragged on for 3 months, the
enemy was eventually flushed out of it’s defensive positions.
It pelted down with rain for an hour, but eventually the clouds
dispersed and the sun came out.
His mother had asked him to wash up the plates and the
cutlery, but he tried to worm/weasel/ get out of it by making
out that he was sick.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

ON Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 189

Strolling back home from work, I stumbled/happened/chanced
upon a new advert at the bus stop. ‘Be yourself’ was the order
plastered across the centre of the picture, and in the background I
could make out a blurry yet gorgeous girl wearing a mask. She
was wearing very little apart from the mask, and the advert struck
me as verging on pornography. Clearly, it was made to play on
the sense of shame that we feel of our own bodies, calling on us to
slim down, work out, dress up, and urging us to live out our
innermost fantasies, to act out our secret desires. I marched on
past the advert, as though it hadn’t turned me on in the slightest.

Exercise 2
1
2

3
4

5
6

7

8

from p. 189

Sending personal emails is frowned on in the company I work
for.
The local council needs to crack down on the number of
parents that park on the grass verges when they are dropping
their kids off.
If you hang on a second, I’ll be able to rummage through my
bag and fish out the ticket.
He broke off the engagement last week, and, in all honesty, I
think he did the right thing. She was leading him on, so I’m
glad he’s finished with her.
Whether we go to the Christmas party or not hinges on
whether we can find a babysitter or not.
The meeting dragged on for 3 hours, and I noticed that
several colleagues were on the verge of nodding off. The
speaker carried on regardless, droning/rambling/banging on
about quarterly sales and waffling/rabbiting/harping on
about marketing strategies.
The rise in interest rates has brought on a wave of house
repossessions, and economists are worried it could spark off
another financial crisis.
The lifestyle that he follows borders/verges on insanity: his
diet is terrible, his bad habits are numerous, and his social life
is out of control.

Exercise 3

from p. 192

As a child, he’d had problems fitting in at his new school. He tried
latching onto a few kids in his class. They didn’t want him
hanging around, and they tried to show him but he didn’t
cotton/catch on. He carried on following them around in spite of
the fact that they were picking on him. Having put up with their
taunts for 3 months, he finally caught/latched/cottoned on to the
idea that he wasn’t wanted, so he gave up running around after
them. It wasn’t long after this that he found some friends who
truly enjoyed his company.

Exercise 4
1

from p. 192

The crowd were cheering us on, their screams booming out
from all directions.

313

2

3
4
5
6
7
8

She didn’t cotton on to the fact that he had been cheating on
her for the past year. He made out that he was working late,
but he had actually been meeting up with his mistress.
My mum has a nasty habit of listening in on me when I am
nattering away on the phone.
We decided to go in on some pizza, and we all had to chip in
£5 to make sure there was enough to go round.
My boss was mortified when I walked in on him while he was
getting dressed.
I know now that he can’t be trusted because he tried it on with
my girlfriend last week.
The missile was homing in on its target, but at the last
moment it was intercepted.
Having been egged on by several of his friends, he left a
drawing pin on the teacher’s chair; giggling uncontrollably, he
went back to his seat.

lot of people had let me down, but I tried hard not to dwell on this
too much.

Exercise 8
1
2

3

4

5

Exercise 5

from p. 195

Let’s touch on the subject of what forms you as a person: it’s not
the big plans that you are set on doing but never get round to
doing, but rather the little things that you do every day. If you
spend a little bit of time honing a skill, you will eventually master
that skill. The process may be long and arduous, dragging on for
years, but this is the price we pay for all forms of training. Good
habits can be nurtured, and they tend to rub off on others,
spurring them on to achieve their own goals. Unfortunately, the
same can be said for bad habits too.

Exercise 6
1

2

3
4
5
6

7
8

from p. 196

Having touched on the topic of conditionals in the previous
lesson, we will now go through the topic in much greater
detail.
Our neighbours’ child, Peter, is always so polite and friendly.
He gets on well with my son, and I have always hoped that
Peter’s behaviour would rub off on Kevin.
Having been married for 20 years, he suddenly walked out on
his wife and kids and was never heard from again.
As a student at university, I mostly got by on cheap junk food
as I was far too lazy to cook.
The company will take on 50 extra staff members next year to
cope with the rising demand.
Old age has a habit of creeping up on you; day by day the
grey hairs build up, and the wrinkles pile up, but you only
notice them when it is far too late.
The shop keeps selling out of sugar, so we ought to stock up
on some, next time.
Having been arguing about it for 15 minutes, we finally
settled on the red-coloured car.

Exercise 7

from p. 198

As the night wore on, the party died down, the guests
put/threw/flung on coats and hats, and the taxis pulled up outside
to take them home. It dawned on me that fewer guests than we
expected had turned up. I was banking on roughly 100 people
coming, but there was only half that number at the party. We had
laid on food, drinks and entertainment, and unfortunately, a lot of
the food hadn’t even been touched. I couldn’t help feeling that a
Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

6
7

8

from p. 199

The weather forecast says it’s going to be sunny, but I
wouldn’t bank on it.
They offered me a job, and my first instinct was to turn them
down. However, having reflected on the pros and cons, I
changed my mind and took them up on their offer.
The criminals had been lulled into a false sense of security, but
in reality the police were onto them, and it was only a matter
of time before they would be locked up.
Even though I enjoyed writing the novel, the process dragged
on for years. I had to draw/call on my childhood experiences
for inspiration.
I’m sorry, but I have no idea who you are discussing. I am not
well up on celebrity gossip.
Even though the task was incredibly tedious, we had to
plough on in order to meet the deadline.
The suspect knew the whereabouts of the criminals, but the
police were unable to wring this information out of him. He
refused to let on.
Our company plans to cash in on this new opportunity, and we
expect to be raking it in this time next year.

OFF Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 202

I had been waiting in the departure lounge for 3 hours; my flight
had already been put off for one hour, and it looked as though it
might be called off. I was heading out to a small village in
Kamchatka, in which there was no gas or electricity. Having been
working online for so many years, I wanted to feel completely cut
off from the outside world for a week or two. The plane eventually
took off, 2 hours after it was scheduled to leave. My family had
come to the airport to see me off, and it was a tearful goodbye. I
felt lonely when I first got there, but this feeling wore off after the
first few weeks.

Exercise 2

from p. 202

1

When my car broke down on the motorway, the engine was
giving off a strange smell.
2 I asked my boss whether I could knock off early on Friday,
promising that I could make up for it by working from home
at the weekend, but he just fobbed me off with a lame excuse.
3 Though we were playing up to all of our strengths, our
opponents were able to hold us off for the first 80 minutes.
But, in the last 10 minutes, we pulled ourselves together and
managed to score a goal.
4 The neighbours have been belting out music all afternoon, and
I have an exam tomorrow. The racket has put me off my
revision. How am I supposed to swot up on spectroscopy with
all this noise?

314

If the rain holds off for a bit longer, we could dash down the
shops and buy in some food and drink for the party.
6 Even though I had been putting on sunblock every day, the
skin on my shoulders started peeling off.
7 Let’s kick off the lesson with a test on phrasal verbs; I’m sure
you will all sail through it.
8 They jumped/got/leapt off their bikes, ran over to the football
pitch, and met up with all their mates.

Exercise 6

Exercise 3

4

5

from p. 205

By the time the news got round that someone had been bumped
off on the high street in the centre of town, the police had
cordoned off the entire shopping arcade in order to collect
evidence and analyse the scene of the crime. Both ends of the
street had been sealed off with yellow and black tape that warned
‘crime scene – do not cross!’ Out of sheer curiosity, I decided to
walk over to the police cordon and glance over at where the body
of the victim still lay. I was immediately ordered to back off by a
rotund policeman with an angry voice. I tried a different tactic,
asking him when the body had been found, but he just brushed
off my questions with a shrug of the shoulders, telling me that I
should read the newspaper to find out all the details.

Exercise 4
1

2
3

4
5
6
7
8

2

3

5
6

7

8

The price of aluminium levelled off last month, but the
majority of analysts expect the price to shoot up as soon as the
new legislation is rolled out.
One of the oldest tactics to dominate large groups is divide
and rule: by splitting the opposition into two groups, it’s
possible to play one side off against the other.
We were bouncing ideas off each other at the meeting, but
nothing came of it. We still haven’t come up with a good plan.
The intruder tripped over the wire, and the alarm immediately
went off. The noise must have scared/frightened him off, as
nothing seems to have been stolen.
He was putting away a phenomenal amount of beer and wine
last night, so he’s probably still sleeping it off.
As he wolfed down the last mouthful of BigMac, his personal
trainer kindly reminded him how many calories were already
building up in his body. He suggested that he work/burn it all
off in the gym later on.
The road branched off in two directions: to the north and to
the north-east. We mulled over which direction was best, and
eventually went for the most northerly route.
She was nattering away on the telephone, but soon her voice
trailed off as she noticed that a tall dark handsome man had
just walked through the door.

from p. 206

His parents are worried about him; he has been bunking off
classes, and his friends say that he is being picked on by a
nasty group of kids in his class.
It’s been chucking it down all day, but if the rain starts to ease
off, we’ll go ahead with the picnic.
I wouldn’t go to that shop. Last time I went there, the shop
assistant ripped/ mugged me off by giving me a fiver instead
of a tenner.
Having eaten up all his lunch, he started to feel sleepy and
eventually dozed/ nodded/dropped off in his chair.
This meeting has already dragged on for 3 hours. I might try to
sneak off without anyone noticing.
Let’s finish off the lesson with an oral test to see who has
really learnt all of these verbs by heart.
She broke off the engagement last week when he owned up to
having cheated on her.
One of my colleagues is prone to slacking off, and if he
carries on like this, the boss will get rid of him.

Exercise 5

1

from p. 209

from p. 209

Bonfire night is my favourite festival, and I fully intend to ask
over lots of friends and set/let off lots of fireworks. People don’t
usually get/knock off work until 5, so we’ll kick off at 6 o clock.
I’ll put together a ‘Guy’ with the kids as that’s all part of the fun.
We’ll grab some worn-out jeans and an old shirt, stuff them with
newspaper, and stick a mask on top. Early evening on the fifth of
November, we start by setting fire to the Guy on a large bonfire,
and then we move on to setting/letting off the fireworks. Some of
the cheaper ones fizzle out and are rather unimpressive, so I
always invite my mate Steve, who always seems to lay his hands
on the most impressive rockets in town, which always go off with
bang. The number of people at the party usually thins out at about
10 pm, and I reckon I’ll be seeing off the last of them around 11.
Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

OVER Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 213

Looking through the newspaper, I quickly came across 3 different
articles that bore on the protests that were boiling over in the city
centre. Protestors had smashed up several government buildings,
and a police car had even been turned over, fortunately with no
one inside, by the angry crowds. More than 50 people had been
hospitalized, and one man had even been run over by a police
van. The police seem to be losing their grip on the situation, and
the author of the article warned that certain areas of the city had
been taken over by protestors.

Exercise 2
1

2

3
4
5
6

from p. 213

It is a horrible dilemma for anyone to contemplate, and I have
been churning/ turning/mulling/musing it over for many
weeks.
My daughter will be sleeping over at her mates’ house tonight,
and my son is being looked after by his nan, so I’m asking a
few friends over for a beer.
Can you move/shove over, please? You are taking up all the
space on this seat.
I slipped over on the icy pavement, breaking my leg in two
places.
Running back home after class, I tripped over a small rock
and landed flat on my face.
The company turns over more than a billion dollars every
quarter.

315

I’m really sorry for knocking over the vase. How can I make
it up to you?
8 I handed over my driving license to the police officer, and he
slowly pored over it, making sure that all the details were
correct.

Exercise 2

Exercise 3

3

7

from p. 216

Parents who fuss over their kids tend to do them a lot more harm
than good. While it is understandable that mums and dads would
want to help their offspring, it’s clear that too much help can often
leave the child feeling helplessly dependent on others. Therefore,
it’s important that parents bear in mind that they are bringing up
future adults rather than perpetual toddlers. We must rein in our
instincts to help, allowing our rationality to win out over our
emotions. If the child refuses to cooperate, he can easily be won
over with rewards and encouragement. So, the next time you find
yourself running around after your kids, mull over these words.

Exercise 4
1
2

3
4
5

6
7

8

1

2

4

5
6
7
8

from p. 217

I’m so sorry for shouting at you like that. I really don’t know
what came over me.
When I brought up the money that he owed me, his face
clouded over and he barely said another word. He doesn’t like
paying people back.
I’m afraid he has a nasty habit of talking over me whenever I
start to speak.
Politicians have a habit of glossing over the awkward details
and skirting around the truth.
His own mother turned him over to the police when she
realised that he had done over his neighbour and buried his
body under the patio.
He fell out with his best friend, Martin; I offered to speak to
Martin in the hope of smoothing things over between them.
Manchester United looked as though they were struggling in
the first half, but eventually they won out over their
opponents.
Go back over these phrasal verbs as often as possible, and I
am sure they will start to sink in.

AROUND and ABOUT
Phrasal Verbs

I always found it particularly easy to get around my father; as
long as I worked hard as a student, he would let me get away
with anything.
The minister did his utmost to gloss over the hideous facts and
skirt around the ugly truth.
When they offered me a job, I realised that this was an
opportunity to turn my life around.
The defendant was going about his usual business on the day
in question, and there is nothing even remotely suspicious
concerning his movements.
My mum always does her best to shop around before she buys
anything, and she always gets good discounts.
If we don’t set off in 10 minutes, we are going to miss the
flight, so stop faffing around and pack your suitcases.
The journalist decided to snoop around, and the first thing he
did was sift through the rubbish.
He’s always bossing around his little sister, and if he has a bad
day, he takes it out on her. It’s high time his parents came
down on his behaviour, but instead they just fuss over him.

THROUGH Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 220

As a teenager, I wasted many hours hanging/standing around the
arcade machines on the seafront. I remember saving up my pocket
money and frittering it away in a matter of hours. As soon as I had
run out of money, I’d look around for coins that had been missed
and were still lying around in the machines. Sometimes my
friends and I would go around pushing and shaking the cointipping machines to try to make some of the money drop out. If
any of the staff ever caught us fiddling/ playing around with the
machines, we would usually be thrown out.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 224

Flicking through my magazine, I stumbled upon a tragic story
about a group of young students that had got lost in the jungle;
their route had taken them through a dangerous area that was
famous for armed gangs, dangerous animals, and treacherous
mountains. Firstly, they waded through a river that was crawling
with snakes and piranhas. One person was bitten by an adder, so
the group decided to put up their tents and light up a fire, hoping
that someone would see their smoke and come to rescue them.
They only had enough food supplies to see them through the
week, so their prospects were bleak. By the time they had run
through all the food supplies, two members of the group decided
to plough through the jungle in a last ditch attempt to find
civilization. Their courage and determination paid off; having
been on foot for 2 weeks, living on the berries and fruit that the
jungle provided, they finally ran into a farmer that fed them and
drove them back to a nearby town. While these two members
survived, none of their friends managed to live through this ordeal.
Exercise 2

Exercise 1

from p. 221

from p. 225

1

Please doctor, level with me. Do you think he’ll pull through,
or should I prepare myself for the worst?
2 I’ve been rummaging through the junk in the garage, but I
still can’t find my angle grinder. I think I might have put it
away in the shed, so I’ll go and check there.
3 It is when we are going through the most difficult moments in
our life that our courage shines through.
4 The rain was pelting down and thunder was booming out, but I
slept right through the storm.

316

5

He was thinking of dropping out of university, but it’s his final
year. I convinced him that it would be wiser to see the rest of
his course through.
6 We had already booked up the hotel and the flight, but
unfortunately the embassy turned down our visa applications,
so our plans fell through at the last minute.
7 We are receiving reports that a lorry has ploughed through
pedestrians and vehicles in the centre of the city, and police
are treating the incident as a terrorist attack.
8 Hopefully, I’ll be able to muddle my way through the next
exercise, even though I am bad at algebra. I’ll try to come at
each problem in a methodical way.

1
2
3

4
5
6
7

8

from p. 228

2

5
6
7
8

from p. 232

He has been incredibly cruel to her; I don’t know how he lives
with himself. He has been toying with her feelings all along.
Some people say we should do away with capital punishment,
and I agree. A death sentence allows the criminal to get the
punishment over with sooner rather than later. A life sentence
is much harder to live cope/deal/live with.
Excuse me, have you finished with that magazine? You have?
Thanks. I’d like to thumb through it.
This temperature is unbearable. I’m breaking out in a sweat. I
could really do with a cold beer.
If your boss doesn’t respond to your complaints, you’ll just
have to have it out with him at the end of the day.
He had a habit of gibbering incoherently, so it was difficult to
keep up with him.
That class is absolutely out of control. I don’t know how you
put up with them; they come out with such rude remarks.
I didn’t have any tent or sleeping bag, so I made do with a
small bush and a bed of leaves.

FOR Phrasal Verbs

from p. 228

Could anyone do with a cup of tea? I can put the kettle on.
I don’t know how these warmongers can live with themselves
when they have so much innocent blood on their hands.
If you are in any way dissatisfied with our service, please take
this up with a member of staff and they will carefully deal
with your complaint.
Wow, you look really spruced up, and your jacket goes well
with your shoes.
I was disgusted at how long it took the waiter to bring out the
second course, so I decided to have it out with the manager.
There wasn’t an extra bed for the kids in the room, so they had
to make do with the sofa.
I side with the government rather than with the rebels; it
seems to me that the rebel stands for violence and crime, while
the government stands for law and order.
I couldn’t keep up with what he was saying as the noise of the
traffic kept on drowning him out.

Exercise 3

1

4

Last year, my wife came up with the idea of taking the kids on
their first skiing trip. We booked up our trip for February, sorting
out our accommodation near one of the ski lifts. The room turned
out to be large and clean, which was great. However, the
deafening noise of the roadworks was very difficult to put up
with. Also, there were no duvets on the beds, so we had to make
do with the blankets, which were rather thin and cold. Lastly, the
ski school had kids that already knew how to ski, but our kids
were complete beginners, so they found it hard to keep up with
the rest of the group. In spite of all these difficulties, we did have a
great time.
Exercise 2

Exercise 4

3

WITH Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

anyone might have tampered with our luggage, when it dawned
on me that I hadn’t put the laptop into the suitcase. This was really
irritating as I wouldn’t be able to hook up with colleagues and get
some work done in my free time. As a result, I was miserable
throughout the entire trip, and my girlfriend had decided to finish
with me by the end of it.

from p. 231

I had been toying with the idea of whisking my girlfriend away on
a romantic weekend for ages. She loves beach holidays, so I set
some money aside for an expensive trip to the Bahamas. I couldn’t
possibly part with my new laptop, so I decided to bring that along
with me. We were standing at the check-in desk, being asked if

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

Exercise 1

from p. 235

I wanted to find a new job, but I didn’t want to pack in my job at
the restaurant without having something else lined up. So, I asked
a colleague to fill in for me while I went to an interview at a
different restaurant. I had also asked the same colleague to vouch
for me as a reference on my application form. My boss had passed
me over for promotion more than once, so it was high time that I
stood up for myself. He was playing me for a fool, but I knew I
was worth more to him than he was to me. If you allow people
like that to push you around, you’ll be in for more work and less
money.

Exercise 2

from p. 235

1

I always root for my home team whenever I watch the FA
Cup. If my team haven’t got through the qualifying stages, I
cheer for West Ham.
2 You’ll be in for some bad marks if you don’t buckle down and
read up on all those topics that will come up in the exam.
3 I think I speak for all my colleagues when I say that you are
the best boss we have ever had.
4 There were no public toilets around, so I had to settle for a
bush that was situated where the road branched off in 2
directions.

317

5

It’s well-known that the initials CIA stand for Central
Intelligence Agency.
6 I didn’t want to steal the loaf of bread, but desperate times call
for desperate measures.
7 The building in the run-down part of town was crying out for
refurbishment.
8 If you keep working on your accent, you might even be able to
pass for an Englishman.
9 I was sent an email supposedly from PayPal, but it was
actually a phishing scam. Fortunately, I didn’t fall for it.
10 The suspect can’t account for his whereabouts on the night of
the murder. I think he is keeping vital information from us.

BACK Phrasal Verbs

TO Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

Having been on holiday for 2 weeks, I came back home to
discover that my teenage kids had been getting up to all sorts of
mischief in my absence. Firstly, I saw that they hadn’t kept to our
agreement of never setting foot in my home office; there were
signs that someone had been rifling through my stuff. I showed
them the evidence that bore out my theory of an intruder, and I
put it to them that the intruder must have been a resident of the
house. Jack owned up to having rummaged through my stuff, but
he claimed John had put him up to it. John denied all knowledge
of the affair, but I’m sure he was also involved, and I will see to it
that neither of them gets away with it.

Exercise 2
Exercise 1

from p. 238

Last night, I had the strangest dream, which brought/took me
back to my childhood. I dreamt that my childhood cat, Tammy,
was still alive, but she was very sick. I took her to the vet, and,
having examined Tammy, he told me that she would never bounce
back and that she would need to be put down. He offered to do this
with a lethal injection, but then he pointed out that this would set
me back £500. I couldn’t afford to fork out such a large amount of
money, so I was relieved when the vet said that I could put the cat
out of its misery myself. He advised me to simply hit the cat with
a large rock, explaining that this would kill it instantly; however,
when I tried to do this, the cat looked in so much agony that I
burst into tears, unable to hold back my sorrow. I tried hitting it
over and over again, in order to put an end to its suffering, but
each and every blow made the cat look more helpless and made
me feel more guilty. When I finally woke up, I had broken out in a
sweat and could feel nothing but remorse. Looking back, I think
my feelings for the cat represented powerful contradictory
emotions.

Exercise 2
1
2

3
4

5
6

7

from p. 239

The police had cordoned off the whole area, instructing all
bystanders to step/stand/pull/get back.
Self-employed people try to claw back some of the money
they have spent on their business by taking their expenses
away from their profits.
On hearing the joke, I couldn’t hold back my laughter, even
though I knew that it would offend someone.
He stubbornly refused to give/hand it back, and it was only
after 3 hours of trying to win him over that he eventually
backed down.
When I look back on my childhood, I realise that I was very
lucky to have been brought up by my uncle and aunt.
The project suffered from a number of setbacks. In the end,
the investors backed out of the deal, afraid that they would
lose even more money.
When I tried to fish my wallet out of my pocket, I couldn’t
find it, so I doubled back to see if I had dropped it on the way
to work.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 242

1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8

from p. 242

When I come up against insurmountable difficulties, I turn to
my auntie for advice.
I’ve always looked up to my older brother; he has a talent for
bringing out the best in all those around him.
You told me that you caught up with him on the High Street
yesterday. What has he been up to? I haven’t seen him for
ages.
I’m looking forward to travelling to Japan for the winter
period.
My parents are going away for a couple of weeks, and I will
have to see to their cat while they are away.
My dad used to take me windsurfing while I was a boy, and I
took to it like a fish to water.
I’m really sorry for breaking your mobile. How can I make it
up to you?
I’ll need to get my mobile seen to as it’s been playing up for
the last few weeks.

Exercise 3

from p. 245

Recently, we went on a trip to the beautiful village of Rye, and it
certainly lived up to its reputation as the most historical town in
England. We got to the village by train, and I came with my wife
and kids, which meant that the total cost of the tickets came to 50
pounds. We stayed in a beautiful old cottage, which certainly
came up to our high standards. There were thousands of other
tourists dressed up in the clothes of the 1940s, and I put this down
to a classic car festival that was going on that weekend.
Unfortunately, we didn’t get round to going to the local castle, but
this was because there were so many other things to do.

Exercise 4

from p. 245

1

When the patient finally came to, he could see that he was
lying on a bed in a room with white walls. He could also make
out what looked like a window.
2 No matter how much she talks down to you, you mustn’t let
her get to you. You need to put on a brave face and soldier on.
3 I think that all youngsters should start paying rent when they
are 18. It makes them face up to their obligations as adults.

318

4
5
6

7

8

Whether we decide to come or not will boil down to the total
cost of the trip.
And so, let’s raise our glasses and drink to the bride and
groom, who have a happy future lying ahead.
If you don’t stand up to those bullies, they will walk all over
you; surely, you don’t want to be picked on for the rest of your
life.
I have tried to explain to my sister that she is wasting her
money, but she just won’t listen. I don’t know how to get
through to her.
I’m afraid I don’t know how to answer that question. I will
have to swot up on this topic at home, and then I will get
back to you with an answer.

OF Phrasal Verbs

AWAY Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

Slaving away on the next chapter of the book, yawning, tired of
staring into the screen, I was suddenly brought to my senses by the
noise of the cat flap. Looking down, I expected to see my own cat,
but to my astonishment a large black cat crept into the room,
miaowing softly. I had to turn this cat away, because this was the
very cat that had been slipping into my shed at night, eating up all
the food that I had left out for my own cat, then stealing away
with a full stomach. My poor cat would start to waste away if I
didn’t get rid of this thief. So, I put a few drops of water on my
hand, took aim, and fired the smallest amount of water at the
cheeky intruder. She quickly scurried away.

Exercise 2
1

Exercise 1

from p. 248

What do you make/think of the latest headline claiming that,
thanks to a scientific breakthrough, maternity clinics will be
offering parents the chance to choose the sex of their unborn
child? A powerful cocktail of hormones primarily made up of
either oestrogen or testosterone will be injected into the
developing foetus, thereby triggering male or female
characteristics. But what will come of all this? What will become
of the approximate one-to-one ratio of male to female humans?
The fact that scientists can now produce this kind of technology
speaks of their incredible skill, but the fact that society chooses to
allow this kind of technology speaks of our infantile morality. We
turn a blind eye to the potentially dire consequences so that a few
adults can choose their baby as if he or she were a packet of
grapes at Tesco.

Exercise 2
1

2
3
4

5

6
7
8

from p. 252

2

3
4
5
6
7
8

from p. 253

Those flowers will start to wither away if you don’t water
them a little more often.
The scarecrow is supposed to scare/frighten the birds away,
but the birds seem to have cottoned on to the fact that the
scarecrow is made of straw.
He is a hard-working chap who never shies away from an
extra hour of hard labour at the end of the day.
When he’s in the middle of that computer game, he just can’t
tear himself away from the screen.
He likes to while away his Sunday afternoon in front of the
TV with his family.
I’ve been squireling away my small coins because I’m taking
the kids to the penny arcade on Saturday.
Her husband has whisked her away on a romantic cruise in the
Mediterranean.
The defendant’s lawyer tried to explain the evidence away,
pointing out that the police may have contaminated these
items with fibres from the suspect’s clothes.

from p. 249

We managed to talk them into signing the contract last month,
but then they tried to weasel/ worm/get/wriggle out of it last
week.
The fact that he always remembers to say please and thankyou speaks of his good manners and fine upbringing.
I used to love playing computer games, but when I started
university, I quickly grew out of it.
It looks as though the minister gave several profitable
contracts to a business that his son-in-law owned; the whole
affairs smacks/reeks/stinks of corruption.
When my son told me that he wanted to drop out of
university, I tried to talk him out of it. But in the end, I gave
in.
Ever since she sent you that text, you’ve been walking around
in a love-sick daze. Snap out of it!
I filled in about 30 application forms and sent them off, but
nothing came of it. I didn’t get a single reply.
If she is sent down for 2 years, what will become of her
children? Do you think a family member will take them in?

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

AT Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 256

Peering/glancing/looking/gazing at the latest headlines on
Physbrg, I came across an article about Phobos, which is a moon
of Mars. I quickly scanned through the article to find out what the
author was driving at. The main idea was that the massive
grooves on the surface of Phobos may have been caused by
gigantic boulders that rolled across its surface. Having been
thrown up by a huge meteorite, these boulders rolled around the
entire circumference of the moon, eating/chipping/picking away
at the rock and dust, carving out the grooves that we gaze at
through our telescopes. However, looking/ staring
/peering/gazing at the grooves, I couldn’t help but feel that the
scientists were clutching at straws with their hypothesis. If the
grooves had been caused by such boulders, we would expect to
see the grooves stretching out radially from the impact crater. So,

319

the evidence doesn’t bear out their conclusion, and I suspect they
will have to come at the problem from a different angle.

Exercise 2
1

2
3

4

5
6
7
8

from p. 257

The minister has come in for a lot of criticism recently, but she
has nonetheless hit out at her opponents with a fiery article in
today’s newspaper.
I always hide the chocolate away at the back of the cupboard
so that the kids can’t get at it: they aren’t tall enough.
He loves the sound of his own voice and rarely listens to what
others have to say. He tends to talk at people rather than talk
to people.
Not being able to figure out the answer to question 5, I
peeked/glanced at the exam paper lying on my neighbour’s
desk, trying to make out what she had written.
He doesn’t have a very big appetite: he tends to peck at his
food rather than wolf it down.
The builders were leering at all the pretty girls and shouting
out lewd remarks.
His writing skills have improved in leaps and bounds, and if
he keeps at it, he is sure to sail through his exams.
She lashed/hit out at the attacker with teeth and nails, biting
and scratching like a savage beast.

6

Going by what the weather forecast said, we’ll get soaked
through if we choose to have the picnic today.
7 I offered to put my nephew up for a few days, but he doesn’t
abide by my rules.
8 She was very loyal to her husband, and she stood by him in
spite of the smear campaign that was going on in the press.

INTO Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

Yesterday, I bumped into an old schoolmate in the centre of town.
It was great to catch up with him and find out what had been going
on in his life. He told me he had bought into a local business,
raking in huge amounts of money in the process. He was thinking
of ploughing the profits into a new property which he would rent
out to someone. He wanted to tap into the rental market because
there was good money to be made. He tried to talk me into doing
something similar, but I’m not sure that I want to dip into my
savings.

Exercise 2
1

BY Phrasal Verbs
2

Exercise 1

from p. 259

Ben, one of my friends, decided to lose weight using a lowcarbohydrate diet. He has been abiding by all the rules that the
diet recommends sticking to, and I’m sure that if he keeps at it, he
will shed all the weight. I dropped by his place yesterday, and he
was looking much thinner. He swears by this diet as he has tried
out lots of other ones, but they were totally useless. He has been
getting by on meat mostly, because on this diet fats and protein
are allowed, but carbohydrates are frowned upon. I might run this
diet by my doctor and see what he thinks; perhaps, it could work
for me too.

3

4
5
6

7

Exercise 2
1
2

3

4
5

from p. 260

He earns very little money as a part-time worker; I really don’t
know how he manages to scrape by on that salary.
Unfortunately, time has a tendency to slip/fly/whizz/pass by
imperceptibly; one day, you look into the mirror and see an old
man staring back at you.
I had a few alternative ideas for how we could turn the
business round, but I decided to run them by my boss first,
and see what he made of them.
Some people swear/stand by a vegetarian diet, while others
swear/stand by a meat only diet. Personally, I get by on both.
I would put by that 2015 commemorative coin, as there were
very few minted, so they are very difficult to come by. I’m
sure it will cost a fortune one day,

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 263

8

from p. 263

Yesterday, a large lorry ploughed into pedestrians on
Blackfriar’s Bridge, running over more than 10 people,
sending dozens to hospital, and killing 1 civilian.
I’m going to slip into something more comfortable, and then
lie down by the fire with a nice glass of wine.
My older sister laid/ripped/tore into me when she heard that I
still hadn’t paid off the money that I had borrowed from Mum
and Dad.
I think they should put aside his older brother’s clothes as the
younger brother will soon grow into them.
The two countries have entered into a trade agreement, and
both parties are expected to profit handsomely from the deal.
The government tapped into the feeling of resentment that
was rife among the younger generation. Aimless and
frustrated, the young were vulnerable to the crafty strategies of
those in power.
Bursting into the room, the police quickly apprehended all
four suspects, pinned them down, and disarmed them.
On Sunday, I’ll dip into that phrasal verb book and brush up
on some of the phrasal verbs with ‘get’.

AFTER Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 267

We had decided to name our first child after my sister, Wendy, as
the latter had passed away a few years earlier, and we wanted to
honour her memory. Being cheerful and carefree, my daughter
takes after her mother, for I have always been of a more morose
disposition, prone to fits of depression. My wife took time off

320

work for the first couple of years after the birth, in order to look
after the baby, but Wendy hankered after her mother’s attention
when this period came to an end. She had to make do with the
nanny we took on, but for months she would make/come/run/go
after her mother, clutching at her dress as she set off for work. I
think my wife had fussed over the child, running around after her
rather than encouraging her to learn to do things for herself.

Exercise 2
1

2

3
4
5

6
7
8

6

Manchester will go up against Chelsea in the next round of the
cup on condition that Chelsea manages to knock out West
Ham tomorrow.
7 His face clouds over whenever I walk into the room; he must
have something against me, but I’m not sure what it is.
8 There have been serious allegations levelled against the
politician, and the police have already started digging into
these claims.

from p. 267

My dad called yesterday, and he was asking after my brother,
who had been in hospital for a few days. I told my dad that he
was bearing up.
The police made/ran/chased after the back robbers, but the
alarm went off, a cage rolled down, and the police were
completely sealed in, unable to escape from the bank.
I can never remember which member of the royal family
comes after Queen Elizabeth the first.
The country’s legal system is modelled after Anglo-Saxon law
rather than Roman law.
I wish she wouldn’t run around after her husband so much. He
idles away in front of the TV while she cooks, cleans, and
looks after the kids.
Recently, a system of fines has been brought in to encourage
dog-owners to clean up after their dogs.
It is a classic case of unrequited love: he hankers after her, but
she won’t even return his gaze.
She looks like her father, but she takes after her mother: both
of them are downright rude.

TOGETHER Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

To celebrate the New Year, I tried to marshal together a few mates
that would come with me to St Petersburg. It was difficult for
some of my mates to scrape together enough cash for the trip;
therefore, we decided to club together so that we could afford a
big flat in the city centre. This ended up being far cheaper than
going to a hotel. The flat wasn’t in very good condition: some of
the beds were broken and the dining-room table was wobbly. But,
we managed to patch/glue together the broken parts of one of the
beds, so this wasn’t a problem. We all wanted to see different sites
in the city, and so we agreed to split up during the day. However,
in the evenings we stuck/kept/stayed together and found some
delicious restaurants.

Exercise 2
1

AGAINST Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 270

Theresa May has come out against her critics, arguing that a deal
of some sort must be negotiated with Europe. She claims that if
we were to break away from Europe with no deal, this could
possibly spark off a financial crisis. Many MPs from the
Conservative party have already turned against Theresa May,
calling the deal a capitulation to the EU. Several politicians have
even levelled allegations of bribery and corruption against their
Prime Minister, calling for her to stand down. Whatever happens,
it is clear that the question of Brexit has pit one half the country
against the other, even dividing families and friends.

2
3

4

5
6

7

Exercise 2
1
2
3
4
5

from p. 270

The idea that the rich are happier than the poor goes against all
my experience with these two groups.
Children will often play their mother off against their father in
order to gain advantages.
This medicine is supposed to safeguard against colds and flu.
She is well qualified for the job, but her lack of experience
will count against her in the interview.
We ran up against several problems while trying to implement
the new automatic payment system.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 273

8

from p. 274

Sherlock Holmes was trying to piece together the events that
led to the young engineer’s mutilated hand.
Lashing all the branches together with a piece of rope,
Robinson Crusoe was able to build a raft.
Tortoises and turtles are completely different animals, yet they
are often lumped together because of their numerous
similarities.
I thought that he would be able to hold himself together at the
funeral, but I was wrong; he got carried away and burst into
tears, sobbing uncontrollably as the coffin was lowered into
the ground.
I tried to scrape together enough money for a trip to Thailand,
but I had to back out in the end as I hadn’t saved up enough.
When the new wardrobe from IKEA arrived, I started putting
it together straight away as I know the kids always love
playing around with the empty cardboard boxes.
Four of us have a birthday at roughly the same time of year, so
this always brings/draws us all together for a party.
Don’t just sit there feeling sorry for yourself. You’ve got to
pull yourself together and find a job.

321

AS Phrasal Verbs
Exercise 1

from p. 277

One of my favourite stories during childhood was Billy Budd. In
this story, Billy Budd is held up as a shining example of a morally
good man and a perfect sailor. In contrast, we meet the antagonist,
Claggart, who looks on all his fellow sailors as bad men. Claggart
is one of the senior officers, and he comes across as nasty, violent,
and cunning; he even goes so far as to make a very sick man work,
in spite of the captain’s orders to the contrary, and this ultimately
results in the man’s death.
Jenkins, one of Billy’s shipmates, has Claggart pegged as a
murderer after this event, so he plots to get his own back;
however, when Jenkins attempts to creep up on Claggart with a
knife, he is apprehended by Billy, who immediately realises
Jenkins’ purpose. He struggles with the would-be assassin,
disarming Jenkins, saving Claggart from an untimely demise.

Exercise 2
1
2

3

4
5
6
7

8

from p. 277

Our bedroom doubles up as my wife’s office: she works from
home.
The thief managed to pass himself off as an employee from
the bank. Once he was inside, he broke into the main vault,
gathered together the most expensive items, and slipped away
without a trace.
I saved the document as ‘Phrasal Verbs Book’, but when I
tried to call it up on the screen, a lot of what I had written
seemed to have gone missing.
Even though she is actually 35, she could easily pass as a 21year-old; she loves working out and staying in shape.
I marked/put/had him down as an utter fool, but I soon learnt
how wrong I was.
People look on him as a wonderful philanthropist and a
human-rights defender, but all I see is a smug narcissist.
I thought he came across as an authority on the matter during
his presentation. He put his ideas across very well, and the
audience quickly warmed to him.
I wouldn’t go as far as to say that the pupil is lazy, but he
certainly needs to find some more motivation for this subject.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

322

ANTONYMS
Exercise 1

from p. 279

I do my best to blend in the crowd when I don’t want to be
noticed.

He always wears such bright colours that he sticks out like a sore
thumb wherever he goes.

We ran out of petrol in the middle of the journey

We filled up with petrol before we set off

Manchester United lost out to Chelsea in the FA Cup

Chelsea won out over their rivals, Manchester United

Dad offered to pick me up from the station

Dad offered to drop me off at the station

I fished/took my wallet out of my pocket

I put/stuck my wallet (back) in my pocket

He threw/flung/slung/chucked off his clothes and collapsed on
the bed

Having slept through his alarm, he threw/ flung/slung/chucked on
his suit and rushed off to work

I’d like to speak out for all those victims affected by the tragedy

I feel I ought to speak out against the widespread idea that
euthanasia is a good thing

The car sped up as it was turning the bend, and the driver lost
control, veering off the road

If you don’t slow down, you might have an accident

The boss looks down on anyone who regularly takes a day off

I look up to the ancient Greeks and Romans as the masters of
grammar

Exercise 2

from p. 280

Would you like to eat out or stay in, tonight?

Shall we go out and have a meal or eat in?

I usually stay up until about 01:00am

I prefer to turn in early at 10:30

We’ll need to put the deadline off a few weeks

Let’s bring the deadline forward so that we finish earlier

The boxer knocked out his opponent in the final round

The doctor used smelling salts to bring the boxer round

I tried to talk him out of his trip to the plastic surgeon, but he
wouldn’t listen

I managed to talk him into coming to the party

As a child, I loved putting together models of tanks and aeroplanes

We’ll need to take apart the furniture before we move out

The newspaper says that the tide will go out at 10:30am tomorrow

The tide will start coming in at 16:36 and it will be full-tide by
18:00

It started to cloud over and the sun went in.

The sun will come out in a few minutes and you’ll feel much
warmer

The sun comes up at around 6:30

The sun will go down at 16:30

You shouldn’t take on too much at work; you will get stressed out

If I manage to get out of the jobs that my boss gave me, I’ll be able
to chill out.

We have decided to take on 10 new employees

We’ll have to let go of 10 new employees

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

323

Exercise 3

from p. 281

You should take them up on their job offer

You should turn their job offer down

I made up with him in the end; it was silly to argue

We argued about money, and in the end we fell out with each other.

When I realised how mean and selfish he was, I went off him

I warmed to him as soon as I found out how much we had in
common

He sailed/breezed through all his exams

I only just managed to scrape through my exams.

Let’s keep/stay together or else we may get lost

Let’s split up so that we find our missing friend quicker

The rain will come on in the next hour

If the rain holds off for an hour, we won’t get soaked

This pupil finds it easy to keep up with the others

That pupil always lags/falls behind the others

I usually turn to my auntie for advice

I went to a night club but they turned me away

He’s very modest, so he always plays/talks down his achievements

He’s boastful, so he always plays/talks up his successes

I need to warm up by the radiator

I need to cool down by the window

Someone has let down my tyres

Now, I need to pump the tyres up

Exercise 4

from p. 282

We can count him in for the holiday

We can count him out for the holiday

Is that the doorbell? Go to see the guest in

He’s leaving now. Go to see him out/off

He locked himself in the toilet

I locked myself out of my own house

The BBC spoke/ came out against Brexit
The young are against Brexit
They side with the E.U
They stand against Brexit

The voters spoke/came out in favour of Brexit
The old are for Brexit
We side against the E.U.
We stand for Brexit

He fell out with his best friend

He fell in with a bad crowd (got mixed up with)

My clothes were soaked through (really wet)

I dried my clothes out on the radiator

He’s been slacking off all week, zoning out in front of the TV

He’s been slaving away all week, so he’s worn-out

He was pecking at his food

He was wolfing down his food very quickly

That old sofa is falling apart

You need to put together the sofa-bed

She breezed into the office without a care in the world

She stormed out of the office with a face like thunder

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

324

He thought that she was in love with him, but she was actually just
leading him on

SYNONYMS AND
CLUSTERS
Decorate or make
more beautiful

Hold on to sth

from p. 283

As soon as we moved into the new place, we decided to do/jazz it
up.
I spruced myself up for the party. I wanted to look my best.
She dolled herself up, hoping that she would end up meeting
someone at the club.
I only dress up for formal events, such as weddings.

Persuasion

from p. 283

He won me over with a bribe of £1000.
He talked me into playing on the football team, but then my wife
talked me out of it.
If he doesn’t take you up on the offer, I will try to bring/talk him
round.
I’ll suck/crawl/play up to my boss. Hopefully, he’ll come round.
I will try to get round the boss tonight. Hopefully, I’ll wrap him
round my little finger.

A breakdown in relations

from p. 283

After only 6 months, they broke off their marriage.
Their engagement broke down after a succession of rows in
public.
They split/broke up soon after she found out that he had been
playing away.
He walked out on her when he found out she had been cheating
on him.
Having walked in on her boyfriend in another girl’s arms, she
finished with him.

Losing and regaining
consciousness

from p. 284

He was in such excruciating agony that he passed/blacked out for
a few minutes. However, the paramedics were able to bring him
round/to with some smelling salts.
The boxer knocked/laid out his opponent after only 30 seconds in
the ring.
Having been on his feet all day, he blacked/passed out during the
wedding ceremony, but he came round/to a few seconds later.

Sexual Excitement

from p. 284

He came on to her while they were chatting at the bar, but he
came out with some sleazy lines that she found a real turn-off.
He has hit on all the women in the department, but his advances
are always rejected.
The perpetrator of these awful crimes clearly gets off on both
frightening and humiliating his victims; he needs to feel the
anguish of the victim in order to get turned on.
Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

from p. 284

We clung/grabbed/ held on to the edge of our seats as our driver
lost control of the wheels and skidded across the motorway.
As I fell backwards, I waved my arms around, clutching/grasping
at the smaller twigs; however, these just snapped off in my hands.
It was quite a big drop, and I ended up in hospital.
The parasites latch on to their victim, and then feed off the blood.

Reporting sb to authorities

from p. 303

He turned his associate over to the police as soon as they put a bit
of pressure on him.
When one of his classmates threw a paper plane at the teacher, he
immediately told on the pupil.
The police paid him £1000 on condition that he turn in all of his
criminals associates.
In the end, his colleague informed/ratted/snitched on them, and
they were all put away for a long time.
Having been grassed up by his best mate, he was sent down for 5
years.

Find sth or sb by chance

from p. 285

I happened/stumbled/chanced upon a beautiful gold watch at the
market.
When he came/ran/stumbled across the old photos, tears started
trickling down his cheeks.
As soon as we turned the corner, we ran/bumped into 2 of my old
teachers.

Continuation

from p. 285

I thought that our player had been deliberately brought down by
their defender, but the referee told us to play on.
The meeting was incredibly tedious and, what’s more, it dragged
on for hours.
In spite of the teacher telling the kids to keep it down, the class
went/carried/kept on screaming and shouting.
We ought to press/march/soldier/go on despite the awful weather,
otherwise we won’t get back until very late.
The professors at university would often
drone/harp/ramble/waffle/rabbit/go/ bang on at us for hours
about all sorts of utter nonsense.
I found it so tedious to write the essay, but I ploughed on and got
it done by midnight.

Appearing

from p. 285

Not only did he show/turn/roll up 15 minutes late, but he also
sneaked off early too.
I am sure they will come/be along in the next few minutes. Let’ s
be patient.
I have noticed lots of new firms sprouting/springing up all over
the city.
If any problems should crop/come up while you are answering the
questions, put up your hand and I will come over.

325

Depression and rejection

from p. 285

He is constantly having a go at me. It really gets/brings me down.
People who go around putting others down are often those who
can’t put up with jokes aimed at themselves.
I’m going to have to turn down their offer: it is far too low.
We arranged to meet up at seven o clock, but once again he let me
down.

Cause and effect

from p. 286

I put most of the delays in our shipments down to our unreliable
suppliers.
The delays that we have experienced come/boil down to our
unreliable suppliers.
Everything hinges on our unreliable suppliers.
The new law is bound to have lasting consequences. What do you
think will come of it?

Resigning and redundancy

from p. 286

He came down with an awful stomach infection and started
throwing/yacking up all over the place.
I picked up a nasty infection when I had a holiday in the tropics.
But, I got over it a few weeks later.
I break out in a sweat regularly whenever I have a fever.
That new washing powder has brought me out in a rash. (I came
out in a rash after using that powder)

Noise gets quieter

from p. 287

I called/dropped in on my Mum on the way back from work, and
picked up some of my stuff that was cluttering up her garage.
We popped/dropped into the supermarket on the way home, to
pick up some bread.
We’ll pop/drop by (or round) in 15 minutes.

Introducing sth new

from p. 287

The cheaper air fares ushered in a new period of overseas tourism
The government will be rolling out the new legislation next week.
The new system will be phased in over a period of six months.
In spite of several setbacks, the new laws will be brought in next
year.

Spending money

from p. 288

As the kids had sailed through their exams, we decided to splash
out on a skiing trip.
Nobody likes having to fork out large amounts of money to the
tax man.
Having paid off all my debts, I was now able to start saving some
money up for the future.
The total cost of the work would come to £16000, so we started
putting/setting some money aside in advance.

Sharing work or cost

from p. 288

If we all chip/ put in £5, we’ll be able to go in on a pizza.
Let’s all club together, and then we can share out a pizza.
OK, so it looks like a massive job, but if we all pitch in, we’ll sort
it out in no time.
We might need to rope in a few more volunteers to get this project
finished on time.

from p. 287

I wish the neighbours would keep the noise down. Their music
keeps me up all night. I might go and tell them to turn it down.
If those kids don’t pipe/quieten down, I’m going to go upstairs
and tell them off.
The noise of the party died down at around 03:00 am.
His voice trailed off when he saw the hideous apparition creeping
up on her.

Clandestine

Going to people and places
for a short time

from p. 286

The minister was forced to step/stand down when the news broke
out in the papers.
Having slaved away for weeks without any raise in salary, I
decided to jack/pack in the job.
The management are forced to make cutbacks, so several
departments will be downsized, and around 20 employees will be
laid off.

Getting sick

A rival gang has been attempting to muscle in on some of their
business.

from p. 287

I could let you in on a little secret, but you must promise to keep it
to yourself.
At first, we thought that it was only the manager that was
responsible for the fraud, but then we found out that a few of his
deputies were in on it too.
He can be so nosey; he has a nasty habit of listening in on other
people’s conversations.
Our enemies walked/burst/barged in on us while we were
discussing the secret plot.
Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

Publicly declare

from p. 288

The suspect had been holding out on them, but eventually he
blurted/let out the truth.
He comes out with some really odd suggestions sometimes.
Several high-profile celebrities have spoken/come out against the
new laws that will be brought in next month.
The dire situation calls for actions, not words.

Removal from a surface

from p. 288

The kids had been bouncing around all day, but eventually they
jumped/rolled/got off the trampoline.
He fell off the ladder while he was painting the wall.
The lion tore/ripped/bit his whole arm off during the attack.
I peeled off the skin and handed the orange over.
The engine was giving off a peculiar smell, so we pulled over and
had a look under the bonnet.

326

Sorting out your schedule

from p. 289

I don’t think I will be available on Monday, so can we put the
lesson off for a week?
I will pencil you in for Monday the 16th of January, but if you
can’t make it just email me and we’ll call it off.
We could bring the last meeting forward a few days, and then we
will have time to iron out any remaining difficulties.

Eating and drinking

from p. 289

I splashed out on the most expensive meal on the menu, and
gobbled/ate it up in seconds.
You really ought to slow down when you drink alcohol: you gulp
those beers down far too quickly.
Look at how fast he wolfed down his dinner.
He doesn’t seem to have any appetite; he just sits there pecking at
his food.
There were a number of cakes left on the plate, but I polished
them all off.

Ignoring people and things

from p. 289

Journalists and politicians are notorious for glossing over the
details and skirting around the truth.
The minister has come in for a lot of criticism this week, but he
has shrugged/brushed off the comments in the media, claiming
that they are politically motivated.
Whenever anyone knocks on my door, asking for money, I fob
them off with a lame excuse.
She made up lame excuses to explain away the missing money.

Happening according to plan

from p. 289

We had laid on lots of food and drink, and, fortunately, the party
went/came off exactly as we had planned. It certainly went down
well with all the guests.
We were under a lot of pressure to finish the project before the
deadline, and I didn’t think we’d be able to pull/carry/bring it
off.
They set up a new business, but things didn’t pan/play out as well
as they had hoped.

Studying

from p. 290

I really ought to brush/swot/bone up on my algebra, and then I
will sail/breeze through the test.
I’ll barely scrape through the test if I don’t pore over those
formulae.
If you regularly run/go over the phrasal verbs, they are bound to
sink in.

Feelings and emotions

from p. 290

I don’t know why he got so carried away. He seemed to work
himself into an angry frenzy, losing control of himself.
In the last poem, he let his imagination run away with him, so I
found it hard to understand what he was getting at.

I’m not sure what came over me, but suddenly I found myself
screaming at the top of my voice. I think I had been bottling up a
lot of anger, and I had to finally let it all out.

Be good enough or strong enough

from p.

290
He is already 18, so he is certainly old enough to face up to his
responsibilities.
Unfortunately, the hotel didn’t live up to our expectations; the
main problem was that the level of service didn’t come up to the
required standard.
You really ought to stand up to those bullies; if you don’t, they
will push you around for years.
I didn’t feel up to going into work, so I called in and explained
that I had come down with flu.

Leave without anyone noticing

from p. 290

We sneaked/crept out of the meeting while no one was looking.
We stole/crept/sneaked away while everyone’s backs were
turned.
The thief must have spirited away the painting between one and
two o clock.

Ways of looking

from p. 291

The builders leered and whistled at the pretty girls, shouting out
lewd comments as they passed by.
He gazed at his girlfriend with an adoring expression on his face.
When they found out that I was responsible for the mess, they
both glared/stared at me.
Using the microscope, I peered at the small insect on the glass
slide.
He glanced at me for a few seconds, then turned around and left.
Having stashed away a piece of paper with the answers, I peeked
at them while no one was looking.

Attack

from p. 291

The soldier threw/tossed a grenade at the enemy.
The mugger flew/ran/came at me with a knife, so I turned round
and ran away.
He threatened to set his dog on me if I didn’t get off his property.
Lashing/Hitting out at my attacker with teeth and nails, I
managed to get out of his grip.

Come together

from p. 291

My family and other relatives come/get together every Christmas
for a big party.
Christmas is a time that draws/brings together the whole family.
I had to gather/marshal/get together 50 people for the Christmas
party.
I’m not sure I’ll be able to round up 50 people for the party.

Combine

from p. 291

The pieces of this puzzle don’t join/fit/go together.
My son has spent the whole day putting together one of his toys.
Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

327

I managed to cobble together a high voltage supply with some old
electronics that were lying around.
We lashed the pieces of wood together in order to make a raft.

Appear to be or believe sb to be from p. 292
He managed to pass himself off as over 18 even though he is only
15.
I have always had/marked/put him down as an idiot, but now I
see that I was wrong.
Don’t take me for a fool, or you will regret it.
He comes across as cold and aloof, but he is actually just shy and
untalkative.
He strikes me as meticulous and professional, and his team look
on him as a good boss.
His colleagues hold him up as a saint, but I know better.

Respond to sb or sth at a later time from p.
292
I’m afraid I can’t speak now, so I’ll have to get back to you at a
later time.
We have followed up on their complaints, and we have found that
the grievances were well warranted.
We need to act on these complaints, or else our business will
suffer.
We also need to chase up our suppliers, and find out why
deliveries have been held up.

Survive on sth

Deception

from p. 293

He made out that he was a very wealthy man, but the truth was
very different. However, everyone fell for it.
You all thought that I was upset, but I was actually putting it on.
We were all taken in by the lies that were going round in the
newspapers.
Unfortunately, he was diddled/done/cheated out of his fortune by
his relatives.
The taxi driver mugged/ripped me off by taking a much longer
route.

Loud noises

from p. 293

The wedding bells were ringing/pealing out and the crowds were
gathering together to throw confetti over the bride and groom.
I couldn’t hear what he was saying because the noise of the road
works drowned out his voice.
The sound of the radio was always blasting/belting out during
lunchtime.
He had a deep voice which would boom out whenever he gave a
speech.

from p. 292

As students, we got/scraped by on loans from the bank and parttime jobs.
When we realised we could make do with a smaller house, we
decided to sell up and move out.
The herbivore feeds/lives on plants, while the carnivore
feeds/lives on other animals.
He feeds/lives off the generosity of others.

Dave Nicholls | Visual Phrasal Verbs — Answers

328

