abhor “I abhor the process of hiring public servants.” Senator Wayne Morse, speech, 4/17/61
abjure “Galileo was summoned before the inquisition where he was ordered to abjure his
theory.” S. F. Mason, Science Digest, 5/98
abortive “His company made an abortive attempt to circle the enemy position but they fell
back under fire.” Captain Ron Herbert, Keep Your Medals
abounds “A smart thriller that abounds with suspense and excitement!” Newspaper ad for film
The General’s Daughter
abrogate “I decided to abrogate the agreement since General Motors was not living up to its
part of the bargain.” Paul Sawyer, Seeking Justice
abstemious “Be more abstemious Or else, good night your vow.” William Shakespeare, The
Tempest
absurd “Many rules in the English language are absurd because they are based on Latin
rules.” Bill Bryson, Mother Tongue
access “Everything was simplified, and we were gaining access to infinity: soon the moon,
SOON THE MOON!” Editorial, Le Figaro (Paris), 8/14/61
accommodate “The awards will be given out at a place that will accommodate C-Span.” James
Barron, “Public Lives,” New York Times, 6/10/99
accomplice “His chief accomplice was Democratic boss John Dingell, who sold out his party
in the dark of night.” Maureen Dowd, “The God Squad,” New York Times, 6/20/99
accost Sir Toby: “You mistake, knight: accost is front her, board her, woo her, assail her.”
William Shakespeare, Twelfth Night
acknowledged “They used the Swiss routes and camp sites—which they later acknowledged—
and by the end of April were established in full strength at their fifth camp.” James Ramsey
Ullman, “Victory on Everest”
acme “He was the acme of a political figure.” John Gunther, Inside U.S.A.
acrimonious “We quickly learn of the acrimonious relationship between the Montagues and
the Capulets.” Playbill, Summary of Romeo & Juliet
acute “The candidate presented an acute problem for his party because of his independent
views.” Jewell Bellush and Dick Netzer, Urban Politics
adamant “The candidate was adamant in his refusal to answer an embarrassing question
about his early use of drugs.” TIME, 8/12/99
adherents “The state employs a flag as a symbol for adherents to the government as
presently organized.” U.S. Supreme Court decision, 1943
admonished “A little drummer boy grinned in me face whin I had admonished him wid the
buckle av my belt for riotin’ all over the place.” Rudyard Kipling, “The Courting of Dinah
Shadd”
adroit “Amazingly adroit in building model airplanes while he was in junior high, Eric
moved on to an aeronautic career in his twenties.” Val Bakker, “Early Decision” [adapted]
advent “Industrial canning and the advent of freezing have reduced home canning to a
curiosity.” Molly O’Neill, New York Times, 7/18/99
adversaries “Both fighters had nothing but kind words to say about their adversaries.” Hal
Butler, “The Battle in the Rain”
adverse “Illogical as it may seem, adverse criticism can be very rewarding.” S. Andhil
Fineberg, “Deflating the Professional Bigot”
advocates “Advocates of marriage classes contend that giving teens these tools could
eventually curb the divorce rate.” Jodie Morse, “Hitched in Home Room,” TIME, 6/21/99
aegis “The Federal Reserve will remain under the aegis of the veteran head who was
reappointed by the President yesterday.” New York Times, 1/5/00
afflicted “It afflicted the neighborhood with the stench of slime that was now laid bare.”
Edmund Wilson, “The Man Who Shot Snapping Turtles”
affluent “You are affluent when you buy what you want, do what you wish and don’t give a
thought to what it costs.” J. P. Morgan, quoted in Crown Treasury of Relevant Quotations
alacrity “When the price of A.T.&T. dropped significantly, fund managers moved with
alacrity to accumulate more shares.” Ted David, CNBC Financial News
allay “The President’s message was an attempt to allay the fears of senior citizens.” “The
Future of Medicare,” Washington Post, 3/16/98
alleged “I harvested the intelligence that Ricks was alleged to have laid off all that portion of
the State of Florida that has been under water into town lots and sold them to innocent
investors.” O’Henry, “The Man Higher Up”
alleviate “The report of the transportation division pointed out that the overcrowded
highways required immediate attention in order to alleviate the long delays.” The Queens
Courier, 1/11/00
alludes “Gertrude Stein’s phrase, ‘A rose, is a rose, is a rose’ alludes to nothing more or less
than what she writes.” Alice B. Toklas, Time Capsule, 1933
aloof “Greta Garbo held herself so aloof from her co-stars, they felt they had not been
introduced.” Alistair Cooke, The Great Movie Stars
altruism “The conflict is between selfishness and altruism.” Former Senator Estes Kefauver,
campaign speech
ambiguous “If you disagree with a friend, be firm, not ambiguous.” Samuel Ornage, The
Golden Book
ameliorate “Our aim should be to ameliorate human affairs.” John Stuart Mill
amicable “Their parting is effective Friday, and was described in their joint statement as
‘amicable’.” Bill Carter, “Lou Dobbs Quits CNN,” New York Times, 6/9/99
amnesty “No one is advocating wholesale amnesty for inmates solely because of advancing
age.” Tamerlin Drummond, “Cellblock Seniors,” TIME, 6/21/99
amorous “A complete gentleman ought to dress well, dance well, have a genius for love
letters, be very amorous but not overconstant.” Sir George Etherege, The Man of Mode
analogous “Not with the brightness natural to cheerful youth, but with uncertain, eager,
doubtful flashes, analogous to the changes on a blind face groping its way.” Charles Dickens,
Hard Times
anathema “The founding document of the American Reform movement depicted ritual as
anachronistic, even anathema in an enlightened age.” Samuel G. Freedman, “The UnReformation,” New York, 6/21/99
annals “He would begin these annals with Columbus, and he would keep on with them until
his hand was too palsied to hold a pen.” Catherine Drinker Bowen, Yankee from Olympus
anomaly “My mother was American, my ancestors were officers in Washington’s army, and I
am an anomaly.” Winston Churchill, speech, 1953
anthropologist “Burning tobacco, anthropologists have found, was a religious practice over
2000 years ago in the Mayan culture.” Journal of Urban Health, 9/99
antipathy “There is no need to anticipate any antipathy from your future in-laws when you
plan a wedding.” “Wedding Guide,” Courier-Life Publications, 7/99
antiquated “The custom of throwing rice at a newly married couple is an antiquated one,
originally meaning a wish for many children.” “Wedding Guide,” Courier-Life Publications,
7/99
antithesis “Drunkenness is the antithesis of dignity.” Bergen Evans, “Now Everyone is Hip
About Slang”
apathy “The younger generation exhibits apathy toward the issue of freedom of the press.”
Herbert Brucker, Journalist
appalled “A calm and steady temperament deserted him while he stared, appalled, at the
contents.” John Cheever, The Wapshot Chronicle
appellation “He went under the appellation of ‘Pretty Boy’ but to his victims he was anything
but that.” Dexter Holcomb, Did the Roaring Twenties Really Roar? [adapted]
arbiter “Sonja Henie became the supreme arbiter of skating fashions.” Maribel Y. Vinson,
“Ice Maiden”
arbitrary “My arbitrary decision not to run puts Massachusetts at a disadvantage and
probably was a mistake.” Representative Martin Meehan in Newsday, 6/1/99
archaic “Many procedures of the law have long seemed archaic to laymen.” Supreme Court
Justice William O. Douglas, quoted in San Francisco Examiner, 1/4/71
ardent “There is no more ardent performer than Judy Garland as she allows her emotions to
shine through.” Penelope Houston, Sight and Sound, 1954
arrayed “She arrayed herself in what seemed unbelievably beautiful clothes.” Sherwood
Anderson, Winesburg, Ohio
artifact “In caves in Chile, remains of horses have been found along with human artifacts.”
A. Hyatt Verrill, The Strange Story of Our Earth
artifice “The successful advertiser will use any artifice to get his message seen.” E. S. Turner,
The Shocking History of Advertising
artless “Behind the naive, artless manner, there was a woman scheming for success.” John
Simon, Reverse Angle
ascended “As he set himself to fan the fire again, his crouching shadow ascended the opposite
wall.” James Joyce, “Ivy Day in the Committee Room”
ascertain “Scientists have been trying to ascertain why dinosaurs became extinct so
suddenly.” A. Hyatt Verrill, The Strange Story of Our Earth
ascetic “You don’t have to be an ascetic to wonder if there isn’t something a bit manic about
the pace of getting and spending in today’s America.” Paul Krugman, “Money Can’t Buy
Happiness. Er, Can It?,” New York Times, 6/1/99
asinine “We have developed what I believe is an asinine rating system for motion pictures.”
Harold Owen, Jr., The Motion Picture
asperity “The path of beauty is not soft and smooth, but full of harshness and asperity.”
Havelock Ellis, The Dance of Life
aspirants “A number of playwrights, small aspirants to the big screen, must already be
pricing beach houses in Malibu.” Ross Wetzsteon, Introduction to New Plays USA
aspire “To humility indeed it does not even aspire.” John Henry Newman, The Idea of a
University
assets “Berkshire Hathaway is a diversified holding company with assets in manufacturing,
insurance, aircraft safety training, etc.” “Warren Buffet’s Fabulous Fund,” Mutual Funds
Magazine, 6/99
assiduously “Richard Greenberg is aiming here for big laughs at the expense of the
generation he so assiduously chronicled in the past.” Peter Marks, “Making Mincemeat of
Boomer Values”
astute “From an astute standpoint, that’s exactly what the ballplayers should do instead of
running out to mob the other guy.” Tim McCarver, Baseball for Brain Surgeons
atrophy “Some people thought that too much reading would atrophy a girl’s brain forever.”
Ann McGovern, The Secret Soldier
attenuated “The players’ strike resulted in an attenuated and boring season.” Sports
Illustrated, 10/96
attest “Thousands of satisfied users can attest to the great features such as Voicemail and
Caller ID that work the same way wherever you go on our network.” Newspaper ad for
Internet company, New York Times, 6/12/99
atypical “He is an atypical candidate, without glamour, fame or wealth.” New York Post,
8/15/99
au courant “He seemed to be au courant with everything.” Arnold Bennett, Lord Raingo
audacity “Boldness be my friend! Arm me, audacity, from head to foot!” William
Shakespeare, Cymbeline
augmented “The Russian army was augmented by helicopters and rocket-launching tanks in
its attack on the defenders.” Newsday, 11/27/99
austere “New York City was founded by austere puritan colonists who could never imagine
the city as it is today.” Moses Riechin, The Promised City
automaton “She’s an automaton; she has every quality in the world, and I’ve often wondered
why it is with all that I’m so completely indifferent to her.” W. Somerset Maugham, The
Treasure
avarice “He could not disguise his avarice under a cloak of religion.” Ambrose Bierce
aversion “During the last years of his administration the mayor showed an aversion to taking
political risks.” Jewell Bellush and Dick Netzer, Urban Politics
avid “CUNY will have no more avid and fierce supporter for its mission than himself.” Karen
Arenson, “New Vice-Chairman of CUNY,” New York Times, 6/10/99
awesome “Africa has some of the most awesome jungles in the world.” John Hersey, Into the
Valley
badger “There are other do’s and don’ts: don’t threaten your children, don’t badger them.”
Newspaper ad for Partnership for a Drug-Free America, New York Times, 11/4/99
bagatelle “He saw the benefits to his people as a mere bagatelle.” Winston Churchill, Great
Contemporaries
balk “She rested on the stair—a young woman of a beauty that should balk even the justice of
a poet’s imagination.” O. Henry, “Roads of Destiny”
banal “Mansfield Park is a bore! What might have been attractive on a TV screen proved to
be uninteresting and banal on the big screen.” “Koch Goes To The Movies,” Queens Courier,
1/12/00
barometer “We watched carefully to see the ties that Mr. Smythe would wear as they were a
sure barometer of the mood he would be in.” Loring Brewster, “Vermont’s Mr. Chips”
bedlam “There was bedlam as the crowd awoke to the relief of victory.” Dick Thatcher,
Against All Odds
begrudge “Taxpayers never seem to begrudge the use of their money when spent on local
projects important to them.” Newsday, 8/22/99
belated “When he made his belated entrance into the political campaign, he was told he had
no chance.” Jewell Bellush and Dick Netzer, Urban Politics
belittle “To say this is not to belittle subject matter, which is clearly essential to any proper
education.” William H. Kilpatrick, “Progressive Education”
belligerence “North Korea’s belligerence in planning to test a long-range missile has led to a
dramatic change of course for Japan and South Korea.” Howard French, “Two Wary
Neighbors Unite,” New York Times, 8/4/99
benevolence “My relationship to this land is purely spiritual: It’s a place of absolute silence,
absolute benevolence.” Stephen Trimble, Wilderness
bereft “The pictures of the bereft survivors searching for their loved ones are painful to see.”
Newsday, 9/19/99
besiege “He felt unable to carry the Confederate lines and settled down to besiege their
fortifications.” David Herbert Donald, Lincoln
besmirch “A primary attack on any witness against your client is an attempt to besmirch his or
her character.” Quoted in New York Times Magazine, 9/20/70
bias “U.S. SUIT CHARGES BIAS IN NASSAU COUNTY PROPERTY TAXES” Headline, New
York Times, 6/15/99
bigot “For only by claiming the limelight can the bigot draw followers and an income.” S.
Andhil Fineberg, “Deflating the Professional Bigot”
bizarre “The police claim they were responding to the bizarre behavior of the man when they
were forced to shoot him.” New York Post, 9/27/99
blasé “When he hit the home run that broke the record, he could no longer maintain his
previously blasé attitude.” Newsday, 9/8/98
blatant “It’s a classic blatant pyramid scheme.” Robert Hanley, “Gifting Club,” New York
Times, 6/23/99
bliss “Is there anything to match the bliss on a teenager ’s face the day she obtains her license
to drive?” Car and Driver, 9/99
bluntly “Managers will put it bluntly: ‘You’ve got to catch the ball.’” Tim McCarver, Baseball
for Brain Surgeons
bogus “The mayor denied his proposed change in the election law was a bogus attempt to
seize more power.” New York Times, 9/25/99
bona fide “Milosevic, a bona fide villain, will pay for his war crimes—we can be sure of
that.” Editorial, Washington Post, 5/28/99
brash “Baker ’s brash manner quickly antagonized the other warehouse workers.” Seymour
Broock, Labor Meets Its Match
brigands “The history of motion pictures shows that, from the earliest silent films, stories
about western brigands would capture a large audience.” John Simon, Reverse Angle
bristle “No sooner had the dog caught sight of him, however, than it began to bristle and
growl savagely.” H. G. Wells, The Invisible Man
buff “Grandpa was a stock market buff, hanging around the Dreyfus office most every
weekday and following the yo-yo Dow Jones averages.” Eloise Ryan Abernethy, One Family’s
Finances [adapted]
bulwark “That England, hedged in with the main, That water-walled bulwark, still secure And
confidant from foreign purposes.” William Shakespeare, King John
burgeoned “In recent years programs on AM, FM, shortwave and low-powered stations have
burgeoned.” Carlos Johnston, “Intelligence Report” Summer 1998
cache “Fagin drew from his cache the box which he had unintentionally disclosed to Oliver.”
Charles Dickens, Oliver Twist
cacophony “At his side he had a battery run radio blasting forth a sickening cacophony of
noise.” Freeman Tilden, The National Parks
cajole “We had to cajole tonight’s guest to come on the program because he’s something of a
hermit.” Larry King on his CNN TV program, 8/25/99
callous “The movie industry was callous in the way it treated writers who came from New
York.” Alex Ross, New Yorker, 2/23/98
callow “A group of newly arrived callow students followed nervously at the director ’s heels.”
Aldous Huxley, Crome Yellow
calumny “Overwhelmed by the calumny heaped upon him for his prejudice, he quickly
resigned.” Jewell Bellush and Dick Netzer, Urban Politics
canard “It’s a canard to say I want to be a millionaire: I just want to live like one.” Toots
Shor, quoted in Life Magazine, 10/12/69
candid “Sweepstakes companies must be more candid about the chances of winning a prize.”
AARP Bulletin, 9/99
candor “He was struck by the candor and self-reliance of the women in these islands.”
“Pacific Paradise,” New York Times, 8/9/99
cant “Although we hear much cant about loving one’s neighbor, life provides endless
examples of just the opposite.” Paula Love, The Will Rogers Book
capitulate “The embattled leader refused to capitulate to demands for his resignation.”
Newsweek, 8/19/99
capricious “The snow removal equipment is always ready to face the capricious weather
changes during the winter.” Newsday, 12/24/98
carnage “Amid the carnage resulting from the earthquake, many acts of courage can be
seen.” New York Times, 9/20/99
castigates “Here is Holofernes commenting upon Armando, a mad wordman who castigates
another while himself vocalizes into a fine frenzy.” Harold Bloom, Shakespeare
catastrophic “Romeo changes enormously under Juliet’s influence, remains subject to anger
and despair, and is as responsible as Mercutio and Tybalt for the catastrophic event.” Harold
Bloom, Shakespeare
caustic “His habitual sullenness, stern disposition and caustic tongue produced a deep
impression upon our young minds.” Aleksandr Pushkin, “The Shot”
celerity “The human mind acts at times with amazing celerity.” Benjamin Cardozo, The
Growth of the Law
cessation “The evolutions of the waltzers were quieted, there was an uneasy cessation of all
things as before.” Edgar Allan Poe, “The Masque of the Red Death”
chagrin “He spent great energy and achieved, to our chagrin, no small amount of success in
keeping us away from the people who surrounded us.” James Baldwin, Notes of a Native Son
charisma “Yali radiated charisma and energy as he led his people.” Jared Diamond, Guns,
Germs, and Steel
charlatan “Many of my friends believe in fortune tellers; I think they are charlatans.” Letter
to “Dear Abby,” New York Daily News, 5/16/99
chicanery “As a profession, lawyers have become associated with chicanery and confusion.”
People, 2/4/99
chimerical “His utopia is not a chimerical commonwealth but a practicable improvement on
what already exists.” George Santayana, The Sense of Beauty
clandestine “Mr. DeLay’s plan for another ‘independent’ group is nothing less than a
proposal to create a clandestine and corrupt slush fund.” Editorial, New York Times, 6/1/99
cliché “The cliché ‘Politics makes strange bedfellows’ certainly applies in this situation.”
Newsweek, 9/20/99
cliques “The tragic event points out the danger of forming cliques in school that shut out
many.” Newsday, 5/15/99
coerce “The loan sharks sometimes have to coerce people in order to collect the debt.” Peter
Kilborn, “Lenders Thrive on Workers in Need,” New York Times, 6/18/99
cogent “This article paints a clear and cogent picture of how to handle blowouts.” Car and
Travel, 9/99
cognizant “I am cognizant of the interrelatedness of all communities and states.” Martin
Luther King, Jr., “Letter From Birmingham Jail”
comely “An island peopled by the most comely women to be seen anywhere, Bora Bora is a
must.” Travel, 11/99
commodious “The new baseball stadium offered a more commodious arena for the fans and
players.” Sports Illustrated, 5/11/99
compassionate “In addition to professional skills, patients want a physician who is
compassionate.” Advertisement for Maimonides Medical Center, 9/25/95
compatible “The policies of the party are not compatible with his conservative beliefs.” U.S.
News and World Report, 8/25/99
compensatory “The compensatory factor was a new arrival; Anukul had a son born to him.”
Rabindramath Tagore, “My Lord, the Baby”
complacent “Weather experts warn not to be complacent about the possibility of a dangerous
hurricane.” New York, 9/18/95
complicity “After 1945, Hitler’s Germans replaced complicity with denial.” Lance Morrow,
“Done in the Name of Evil,” TIME, 6/14/99
component “The F.B.I. did, in fact, develop a racial component, the profile of serial killers as
predominantly white, male loners.” Jeffrey Goldberg, “The Color of Suspicion,” New York
Times, 6/20/99
compounded “The match between England and Argentina, always a blood feud, was
compounded by the memory of the Falklands crisis.” Henry Kissinger, “Pele,” TIME, 6/14/99
comprehensive “Lecter was built up as a superman, embodying absolute yet comprehensive
evil.” Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, “Hannibal Lecter Returns,” New York Times Book Review,
6/10/99
concocting “I am concocting a seduction; I do not require a pastry chef.” Ben Brantley, New
York Times, 6/15/99
concomitant “The doses of the drug were increased with the concomitant result that he
quickly became an addict.” Otto Friedrich, Before the Deluge
concur “Dr. Fishbein did not concur with his colleague’s diagnosis and urged the Harper
family to seek an opinion from the head of the Urology Department at Columbia
Presbyterian.” “Prostate Update,” Prostate Digest, 9/99
condescending “The reviewer treated this important book in the most condescending and
dismissing manner.” Letter to New York Times Book Review, 7/25/99
condolence “Words of condolence seem very poor things and yet they are all one can use to
tell of one’s sympathy.” Maisie Ward, Father Maturin
condone “He does not condone the actions of any of the participants in the impeachment
hearings.” New York Times Book Review, 9/26/99
conducive “The quiet calm of this garden is conducive to romance or repose.” “The
Sophisticated Traveler,” 9/26/99
confidant “Lecter rents a lavish house not terribly far from the modest duplex of FBI agent
Starling, his antagonist/confidant during the period seven years earlier.” Paul Gray, “Dessert
Anyone?,” TIME, 6/21/99
conflagration “Did the firing of incendiary tear gas canisters cause or contribute to the
conflagration?” New York Times, 9/3/99
confronts “When we gaze into a seeming infinity of tomorrows, we face the challenge that
any generation confronts when it looks ahead.” Editorial, “2000 and Beyond,” New York
Times, 1/1/00
congenial “Susan’s congenial manner made her a favorite in the rodeo.” Lacey Fosburgh,
“All-Girls Rodeos,” New York Times, 8/17/99
conjecture “We read to understand how to take care of ourselves, to prepare for the
unexpected, to conjecture what we would do in similar situations.” Annie Proulx, “They Lived
to Tell the Tale”
conjugal Hillary is Our Lady of Perpetual Conjugal Suffering; the patron saint of every
woman who’s ever been wronged.” Maureen Dowd, “Rudy in Reverse,” New York Times,
6/6/99
connoisseur “This is the car for the connoisseur who doesn’t have to think about cost.” Car
and Driver, 10/99
connubial “I never could imagine connubial bliss until after tea.” W. Somerset Maugham,
Cakes and Ale
consternation “Father and son stared at each other in consternation and neither knew what to
do.” Pearl Buck, The Good Earth
constricted “He grew up in slightly less constricted circumstances than his teammates.”
Darcy Frey, The Last Shot
construed “Hemingway’s simple approach was construed as mysticism.” Robert Ruark,
“Ernest Was Very Simple”
consummate “Arnold Zweig, a writer of consummate artistry, presents a picture of delicacy
and charm that hovers on the brink of disaster.” Roger Goodman, World-Wide Stories
contemptuous “It is not difficult to feel contemptuous when studying the ugly behavior of
some of the powerful figures of motion pictures.” Pauline Kael, I Lost It at the Movies
contort “He is an actor who can contort his face into any number of shapes.” People, 4/15/99
controversial “His three-year tenure was controversial and contained charges of racism.”
Monte Williams, “Roosevelt Island Chief,” New York Times, 6/10/99
cope “Every single muscle in the body was strained to the uttermost throughout the watch to
cope with the steering.” Thor Heyerdahl, Kon Tiki
copious “The wedding reception featured copious amounts of food, drink, and music.” New
York Times, 9/26/99
corpulent “When he squeezed his corpulent body into a chair he seemed to be stuck there
forever.” Charles W. Thompson, Presidents I Have Known
corroborated “Bill corroborated the captain’s statement, hurried back down the glistening
ladders to his duty.” Hanson W. Baldwin, “R.M.S. Titanic”
coterie “The aristocratic coterie finally got the upper hand.” Edith Hamilton, The Greek Way
countenance “Behind a most pleasant countenance, this dictator has maintained a most brutal
regime.” Newsweek, 2/21/98
coup “Newt Gingrich was nearly toppled in a coup attempt in the House.” Michael Duffy,
“Who Chose George?,” TIME, 6/21/99
covert “In a covert manner, Knute traveled abroad that night.” Sinclair Lewis, “Young Man
Axelbrod”
coveted “The moment has arrived for our annual coveted ‘Bloopie’ Awards.” William Safire,
New York Times, 7/18/99
crave “It’s the perfect way for the Clintons to hang on to the power, glamour and excitement
they both crave.” Bob Herbert, “It Could Happen,” New York Times, 6/6/99
criterion “This new product is useful, but the major criterion is its safety.” Car and Travel,
10/99
cryptic “Ms. Bogart, an iconoclastic director known for her cryptic reworkings of
everything, turns out to be an ideal interpreter for Gertrude Stein.” Ben Brantley, “Gertrude
and Alice,” New York Times, 6/14/99
culminated “The years of physical and mental training culminated in the fulfillment of a
lifelong dream.” Vim & Vigor, Summer 1998
culpable “When the jury found Stacy culpable, she collapsed in a state of shock.” Eloise R.
Baxter, “Judgment Day”
culprit “We pointed out the tender age and physical slightness of the little culprit.” Thomas
Mann, “Mario and the Magician”
cumbersome “Grizzly bears may look cumbersome and awkward, but don’t be deceived.”
Nature, 2/97
cumulative “There can be an extraordinary cumulative strength in Mr. Foote’s plays.” Ben
Brantley, New York Times, 6/18/99
cupidity “There is little real humor in this picture of cunning and cupidity as revealed by a
petty contest for a paltry sum.” Liam O’Flaherty, “A Shilling”
curry “The candidates are visiting many senior centers in an attempt to curry support among
the elderly.” AARP Bulletin, 9/99
cursory “Even a cursory glance at the text of the peace agreement shows that the Yugoslav
leader has accepted NATO’s demands in full.” Tim Judah, “What Do We Do With Serbia
Now?,” New York Times, 6/4/99
curtail “A court decision to a freeze on regulations to curtail cross-state pollution was
unpopular.” “EPA’s Reduced Standards,” Newsday, 6/15/99
cynical “A cynical view of phone calls or mail offering free merchandise or membership is
the safest approach.” Newsweek, 6/7/98
dearth “There was no dearth of criticism of his work.” H. L. Mencken, “The Case of Dreiser”
debacle “After leading the league for most of the season, September brought the debacle that
ruined their hopes.” Roger Kahn, The Boys of Summer
debilitating “Exercise can help people overcome debilitating illnesses.” Vim & Vigor,
Summer 1998
debris “They continued their support for earthquake victims in the debris of collapsed
houses.” New York Daily News, 8/7/99
decade “Clearly, the first decade of the 21st century will be the ‘e-decade,’ as all forms of ecommerce and e-ways of life continue to grow.” Letter to the editor, New York Times, 1/1/00
decadence “I said earlier that the decadence of our language is probably curable.” George
Orwell, Politics and the English Language
decapitate “The FBI hoped that the arrest of the drug lord would decapitate the illegal
organization.” David Denby, Beyond Rangoon
declaimed “Some of the province’s most illustrious men visited the courthouse and declaimed
within its four walls.” Hazel Grinnell, Travel Journal
decorum “My father’s sense of decorum was shattered by his son’s bad behavior in the
restaurant.” Peter Balakian, Black Dog of Fate
decrepit “Some schools are in such decrepit condition that students will be transferred to
safer schools until repairs can be made.” NYC Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew, Newsday,
7/6/99
deem “You shall stay here as long as the proper authorities deem necessary.” Bernard
Malamud, The Fixer
defamatory “His defamatory remarks about minorities are transmitted on the Internet.” TIME,
8/30/99
degraded “The world is weary of statesmen who have become degraded into politicians.”
Benjamin Disraeli
deleterious “These statutes will have a deleterious effect on the public interest.” Supreme
Court Justice Tom Clark, speech, 1960
delineation “There is no need for an exact delineation of a standard for a permit to hold a
street meeting.” Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter, decision, 1951
deluded “Mrs. Barrows had deluded herself that you visited her last evening and behaved in
an unseemly manner.” James Thurber, “The Catbird Seat”
deluge “The art exhibit brought a deluge of criticism because of its subject matter.” New York
Daily News, 9/28/99
delve “We can help you delve deeper into your destination and take you places most travel
companies miss.” Grand Circle Travel Booklet
demeanor “You could tell by her demeanor that she was more than a bit upset by the
unexpected news.” New York Times, 9/7/99
demur “At first the Crown Prince would demur, but after being prodded, he would generally
choose dictation, which he liked least.” Elizabeth Gray Vining, Windows for the Crown Prince
denote “The origins of the letters ‘O.K.’ to denote ‘all right’ are not clear.” Bill Bryson,
Mother Tongue
depict “How can one depict the beauty and impact of Grand Canyon in words or pictures?”
Freeman Tilden, The National Parks
deplorable “The troops were amazed at the deplorable conditions in the refugee camp.”
Newsweek, 5/12/97
deploy “Eisenhower expressed the hope that the United States would not be the first to deploy
a weapon so horrible.” David McCullough, Truman
deprecate “Why do they always deprecate the efforts of a woman press secretary, but rarely a
man doing the same job?” New York, 9/25/95
derided “He made his living in a vocation so derided it has become a gag phrase: wedding
singer.” Joyce Wadler, “Public Lives,” New York Times, 6/15/99
derived “His political success is derived mainly from the public awareness of his prominent
family.” TIME, 2/16/98
derogatory “When a communist father noticed a religious program on TV, he uttered a
derogatory statement and turned off the program.” J. Edgar Hoover, “Why Do People Become
Communists?”
desist “My husband kicked me under the table and warned me to desist.” Phyllis Krasilovsky,
“Pumpernickel in My Purse,” New York Times, 6/12/99
destitute “Our Supreme Court has said that any citizen has a Constitutional right to have
counsel, and that the court must appoint a lawyer to defend the destitute.” Joseph Welch,
“Should a Lawyer Defend a Guilty Man?”
desultory “Mortimer enters and, distracted by what his aunts are doing, plants a desultory kiss
upon Elaine’s cheek.” Joseph Kesselring, Arsenic and Old Lace
deter “Concern for his job did not deter him from making public the dangers of smoking.”
“Brave Politician,” New York Times, 4/12/99
detriment “The New York City Board of Education voted not to renew the chancellor ’s
contract as the majority viewed him as a detriment to improvements in education.” New York
Newsday, 1/4/00
devout “This author has a devout following among young readers.” New York Times Book
Review, 7/25/98
dexterity “Ali built his career based on his dexterity, both in the ring and in the use of
colorful language.” Boxing, 3/95
diatribe “Rebecca Gilman’s new play could easily have been an easy diatribe against racism.”
TIME, 6/7/99
dilettante “This art exhibit is not for the dilettante; the subject matter is too shocking.” New
York Daily News, 10/3/99
diminutive “A giant of a chef, he is a diminutive, modest man.” New York Post, 10/10/99
discern “He could not see that the Justice’s face was kindly nor discern that his voice was
troubled.” William Faulkner, “Barn Burning”
disciples “Rick and his disciples dominated the entire summer scene, making it unpleasant for
those who were not part of the inner circle.” Ellis R. Sloane, Catskill Idyll [adapted]
discreet “When questioned about her husband’s illegal activities, she kept a discreet silence.”
Newsday, 5/16/99
disdain “Hillary shows disdain for the idea that matters other than policy are anyone’s
business.” Margaret Carlson, “Uh-Oh, the Real First Lady Shows Up,” TIME, 6/7/99
disgruntled “The police believe the damage was done by a disgruntled ex-employee.”
Newsday, 5/16/99
disheveled “The wind tugged at and disheveled her hair.” William Cowper, The Task
dismantle “Wayne Huizenga’s move to dismantle the World Series Marlin squad has hurt the
Florida team at the box office.” Ralph Kiner, baseball announcer, Fox Sports [adapted]
disparage “It (government control) has been called crackpot, but that doesn’t disparage it for
me.” E. B. White, One Man’s Meat
disparate “At the moment standardized tests have a disparate racial and ethnic impact.”
Abigail Thernstrom, “Testing, the Easy Target,” New York Times, 6/10/99
dispersed “The police waded in and dispersed the protesting crowd.” New York Post, 10/23/99
disseminate “In the history of the world, no other tool has allowed us to disseminate more
information than the Internet.” Computer World, 5/99
dissent “In the totalitarian state that utopianism produced, dissent could not be tolerated.”
Anthony Lewis, “Abroad at Home,” New York Times, 12/31/99
distraught “On the veranda of Banker White’s house Helen was restless and distraught.”
Sherwood Anderson, “Sophistication”
diversity “Mr. Oates said this rare document belonged in Queens because it is the center of
ethnic diversity for this country.” New York Times, 1/5/00
divulged “The DNA tests divulged enough evidence to free him from death row.” Newsweek,
2/17/98
docile “How long can they remain docile, living under such terrible oppression?” Business
Week, 6/16/98
doddering “The image of the aged as suffering from memory loss and doddering mobility is
far from accurate.” AARP Magazine, 9/99
doleful “The patients were left in doleful plight, as the whole country resounded with the
consequent cry of ‘hard times’.” Washington Irving, “The Devil and Tom Walker”
domicile “At night he returned peaceably enough to his lonesome domicile.” Theodore
Dreiser, “The Lost Phoebe”
dormant “The disease may lie dormant for years before becoming active and dangerous.”
Johns Hopkins Health Letter, 5/97
dregs “Some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.” William Shakespeare, Richard
III
drudgery “And then she came to find the paralytic aunt—housework—janitor ’s drudgery.”
Anzia Yezierska, “Hunger”
dubious “Many scientists say its experimental merits are dubious.” Margaret Wente, “Fifth
Column,” Globe and Mail, Toronto, 5/27/99
dulcet “Her dulcet tones and intelligent reading of the story captivated the hearers.” “Our
Town,” New York Times, 10/7/99
duped “Barnum knew the American public loved to be duped.” W. L. Phelps, American
Entrepreneurs
duplicity “The duplicity of which he had been guilty weighed on his spirit.” H. C. Bunner,
“Our Aromatic Uncle”
duress “Under duress she was forced to admit having lied during a 1994 deposition in her
breach of contract law suit.” Associated Press report, Newsday, 6/24/99
edifice “My love was like a fair house built on another man’s ground so that I have lost my
edifice by mistaking the place where I erected it.” William Shakespeare, The Merry Wives of
Windsor
efficacy “He runs his office with the greatest efficacy.” Sally Quinn, Chicago Sun Times,
12/9/79
effigy “ANGRY SERBS HANG UNCLE SAM IN EFFIGY ” Headline over Associated Press
photo, New York Times, 8/23/99
effrontery “In view of his personal background, we were astonished at his effrontery in
attacking the morals of the candidate.” Jewell Bellush and Dick Netzer, Urban Politics
egotist “It takes an egotist to believe that nature has provided these beauties as a special act on
his behalf.” Freeman Tilden, The National Parks
egregious “It is mystifying why some women still stick with Bill through so many egregious
episodes.” Maureen Dowd, New York Times, 6/2/99
elapsed “True, a decent time had elapsed, and it was not even suggested that Waythorn had
supplanted his predecessor.” Edith Wharton, The Descent of Man [adapted]
elicit “The experimental animal obviously hoped to elicit a reproduction of the pleasurable
sensations he had experienced under laboratory conditions.” Loren Eiseley, “Man and
Porpoise”
elucidate “The Secretary of State tried to elucidate the government’s policies in the troubled
Middle East.” New York Times, 5/7/98
elusive “In his appearance there was something attractive and elusive which allured women
and disposed them in his favour.” Anton Chekhov, “The Lady with the Dog”
emaciated “Twiggy, whose fame was related to her emaciated look, is now better known for
her singing and dramatic talent.” Play review, New Jersey Star Ledger, 5/12/99
embellished “The prioress may not have told the correct story in all its details and she may
even have embellished the story a little bit to make it more attractive.” Lin Yutang, “The Jade
Goddess”
eminent “It was unbelievable that a man so eminent would actually sit in our dining room and
eat our food.” V.S. Pritchett, “The Saint”
emissary “The mayor sent an emissary to the striking teachers in the hope of starting
negotiations.” Jewell Bellush and Dick Netzer, Urban Politics
emitted “The smoke that was emitted when the bomb went off made some think it was a
firecracker but I thought it was a revolver shot.” Journal of Andre Gide, Vol. I
emulate “Her companions she loved and admired but could not emulate for they knew things
she did not.” Rose Macaulay, The World My Wilderness
encomiums “Isn’t it sad that we receive our highest encomiums after we are gone and unable
to enjoy them?” James Farley, quoted in Ruffles and Flourishes
encumbrance “Maxim decided to dispose of the encumbrance of a whining wife and three
disrespectful teenagers by leaving silently in the dead of the night.” Everett Dodds, Greener
Pastures [adapted]
engrossed “The wasp was engrossed utterly in her task.” Alan Devoe, “The Mad Dauber”
enhance “Her breadth of experience and determination to enhance her knowledge have
increased her value to Con Edison.” Con Edison Report, Producing Excellence, 1998
enigma “He was an enigma—by this I mean that he did not look soldierly nor financial nor
artistic nor anything definite at all.” Max Beerbohm, “A.V. Laider”
ennui “The ennui and utter emptiness of a life of pleasure is fast urging fashionable women to
something better.” Elizabeth Cady Stanton, The Newport Convention
entourage “Sinatra was the greatest but I was never a part of his entourage, his rat pack.”
Comedian Buddy Hackett to New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, New York Daily News, 7/14/99
entreaty “The police captain made one more entreaty for the unruly crowd to leave.” New
York Post, 10/23/99
enunciated “At his press conference, Jerry Springer enunciated his qualifications for a
Senate seat in Ohio.” Francis X. Clines, “Springer Considers Race for Senate,” New York
Times, 8/4/99
epithets “Four scowling men sat in the dinghy and surpassed records in the invention of
epithets.” Stephen Crane, “The Open Boat”
epitome “My community considers a man in uniform to be the living epitome of heroism.”
Lucius Garvin, Collected Essays
equanimity “We have to call upon our whole people to stand up with equanimity to the fire of
the enemy.” Winston Churchill, speech, 1942
eradicate “The urologist said that prostate cancer patients shouldn’t hang their hopes on
having the vaccine eradicate the disease in the near future.” Associated Press, “Vaccine Fights
Prostate Cancer,” Newsday, 10/21/99
erudite “The erudite historian, Prof. Garrett Clark, will speak on ‘Evaluating Democracy’ at
our April meeting.” Lancaster Library Bulletin, Spring 2000
eruption “We have learned about this ancient city, frozen in time by the eruption of Mt.
Vesuvius in 79 A.D.” Grand Circle Travel Booklet, 1999
escalation “There is a dangerous escalation in Kashmir as India and Pakistan are engaged in
the worst fighting in decades.” Editorial, New York Times, 6/22/99
eschew “When in Rome, we decided to eschew Arithmetic.” Ruth McKinney, “Proof in Nine”
ethics “The vast majority of employees perform in a highly satisfactory manner because
good work ethics exist in their kitchens.” Manual for School Food Service Managers in
N.Y.C. Public Schools [adapted]
euphemism “But now he was merely an elder statesman, the euphemism for a politician who
no longer has any influence.” Robert Wallace, “Not Him”
evaluate “Mr. Gooding hopes to find the answer if his mentor gives him the chance to
evaluate the prisoner.” Lawrence Van Gelder, New York Times, 6/4/99
evanescent “The incidents which give excellence to biography are of a volatile and
evanescent kind.” Samuel Johnson, “The Rambler” No. 30
eventuated “Her illness following the chemotherapy eventuated in death.” Terrence Foy, St.
Louis Blues
evince “The vote on Roe vs. Wade will show whether enough senators evince an interest in
overturning the 1973 Supreme Court decision.” Elaine Povich, “Abortion Politics,” Newsday,
10/22/99
exacerbated “Jason Isringhausen’s injuries were exacerbated by his immaturity.” Howie
Rose, Mets Baseball Announcer, Fox Sports, 6/8/99 [adapted]
excoriate “Senator Bradley refused to excoriate his opponent, preferring to take the high
road in the campaign.” ABC Eyewitness T.V. News, 10/21/99
excruciating “An almost excruciating agitation results when a leaf falls into still water.” Jack
London, “To Build a Fire”
exhort “There was no reason for me to exhort the guys to play hard because they were
already giving me 110%.” Mets Baseball Manager Bobby Valentine on Radio Talk Show
WFAN, 10/21/99
exonerate “There is no reason to exonerate him from the ordinary duties of a citizen.” Oliver
Wendell Holmes, Collected Legal Papers
expatriate “For months she lived the nocturnal life of an expatriate American tango bum.”
Jimmy Scott, “Flirting with the Tango,” New York Times, 6/11/99
expedient “There exists the age old choice between a moral action and an expedient one.”
Arthur Koestler, Darkness at Noon
expedite “There was a pressing need to expedite assistance to those suffering after the
earthquake.” Newsday, 8/15/99
exploit “He has not wanted to exploit his fame as a basketball star for political advantage.”
Boston Globe, 7/27/99
expunge “If the offender made it to adulthood without further problems, everything would be
expunged.” James Kilpatrick, “Boy Learns Constitution—the Hard Way,” Burlington Vermont
Free Press, 6/12/99
expurgate “Lenny resisted any attempt by the law to expurgate his language dealing with
personal and private behavior.” “Lenny Bruce, Voice of Shock,” Atlantic Monthly, 5/86
extant “Rumors are extant that the Federal Reserve members are greatly concerned about the
irrational exuberance of investors.” Bloomberg Financial News, 4/12/98
extinct “There are many warnings that loss of habitat will make many species extinct in the
near future.” “The Rotunda,” Publication of the American Museum of Natural History, 5/5/98
extol “They extol the largely nonexistent virtues of bygone eras.” Artemus Abruzzi,
Commonsense
extortion “To the prince who goes forth with his army, supporting it by pillage and extortion,
this open-handedness is necessary.” Niccolo Machiavelli, The Prince
extraneous “The ballet struck me as extraneous and out of keeping with the rest of the play.”
Wolcott Gibbs, More in Sorrow
extrinsic “Disdaining contributions from extrinsic lobbying groups, the candidate won my
admiration and my vote.” Lawrence Burton, “Inside the Polls”
exult “YANKEES EXULT OVER PETTITTE’S PERFORMANCE” Headline, Sports Section,
Newsday, 6/19/99
exultation “We face the year 2000 with a combination of concern and exultation.” Newsweek,
12/15/99
fabricate “Perhaps the dialogues that you fabricate are nothing more than monologues.”
Miguel Unamuno, “Mist”
façade “He hid behind the façade of public servant to work at a private agenda.” H. L. Woods
facet “As soon as one becomes computer-literate, a new technical facet is introduced that
challenges us once again.” New York Times, 10/25/99
facetious “Politicians must be careful about any facetious comment that can be turned into an
opponent’s advantage.” Jewell Bellush and Dick Netzer, Urban Politics
facile “We are usually more facile with words we read than with words we use to write or
speak.” Charlton Laird, The Miracle of Language
factitious “The opposition was challenged by a factitious outpouring of what appeared to be
popular support for the government.” Robert Kaplan, Balkan Tragedy
fallacious “The demand was plausible, but the more I thought about it, the more fallacious it
seemed.” A. D. White, Scams and Schemes [adapted]
falter “Should we falter in our determination to pursue an honorable solution to the problems
of the Middle-East, and face unthinkable consequences?” I. F. Stone, “The Weekly Reader”
fastidious “A single small elephant tusk took no less than two months of fastidious work to
excavate.” Brian Fagan, Time Detectives
fatal “What caused him to lose the election was his fatal mistake of not raising sufficient
funds to publicize himself.” Jewell Bellush and Dick Netzer, Urban Politics
fatuous “After only a few seconds of silence, speakers of English seem obligated to say
something, even making a fatuous comment about the weather.” Bill Bryson, The Mother
Tongue
feasible “Everyone who has looked at the smart guns said there is no quick, feasible way of
doing this.” Leslie Wayne, “Smart Guns,” New York Times, 6/15/99
feint “Young as Oliver was, he had sense enough to make a feint of feeling great regret at
going away.” Charles Dickens, Oliver Twist
felicitous “The evening of hypnotism was not a felicitous one; we were frightened that we
would lose our will or enter into unpleasant acts.” Diary of Anais Nin
felon “I was surprised to see this notorious felon become a regular at our bible discussion
classes.” Rabbi Myron David, A Chaplain’s Jail Tales [adapted]
ferment “She herself yearned for calm, but lived in a neighborhood of ferment and daily
chaos.” Alan Lelchuk, American Mischief
fervid “I’m a mixture of my mother ’s determination and my father ’s fervid optimism.” Gwen
Robyns, Light of A Star
fetish “Today the automobile has become a fetish for one’s standing and accomplishments.”
Mark Twain, Autobiography
fetters “The cruel fetters of the galley slaves were wet with blood.” Alex Haley, Roots
fiasco “Your $25 contribution to our fund will bring you an hilarious tape of the fiasco of an
elementary school’s production of ‘Peter Pan.’” Public Broadcasting Announcement,
12/25/98
fiat “Pitching Coach Bob Apodaca’s fiat to Met hurlers was simple: pitch fast, change speeds,
throw strikes.” Howie Rose, baseball announcer, Fox Sports, 7/8/99
flabbergasted “The President was flabbergasted when his private office recorded
conversations were made public.” Herbert Brucker, Journalist
flagrant “Gene Savoy’s flagrant name dropping doesn’t seem to bother any of the visitors on
board.” Brad Wetzler, “Crazy for Adventure,” New York Times, 6/6/99
flamboyant “Dame Judi Dench is not as flamboyant as the other British theatrical Dames such
as Vanessa Redgrave or Maggie Smith.” Playbill, Vol. 9, No. 55
flay “There is no shortage of critics who flay the journalists for being sensation seekers
rather than news gatherers.” Herbert Brucker, Journalist
fledgling “Women’s professional basketball, recently a fledgling sport, has taken root and
grown into a major spectator event.” Sports, 9/14/99
flout “His ideas frightened the farmers, for he would flout and ridicule their traditional
beliefs with a mocking logic that they could not answer.” S. Raja Ratnam, “Drought”
fluctuated “He fluctuated between mindless talk and endless silence.” Alix Shulman,
“Memoirs of an Ex-Prom Queen”
foist “Eventually, advertisements began to foist off the use of perfume as a way to snare a
man.” E. S. Turner, The Shocking History of Advertising [adapted]
foment “The petitioners were not attempting to foment violence by their peaceful actions.”
Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black, decision, 1960
forthwith “Get down to your Toyota dealer forthwith and take advantage of our holiday
saleabration.” Toyota advertisement, CBS TV
fortuitous “Representative Foley resumed a corridor interview, making a point about the
fortuitous beauty of bipartisanship.” Francis X. Clines, “Gun Control Debate,” New York
Times, 6/18/99
fracas “Once the will was read, there followed a fracas that involved numerous law suits and
lasted years.” Fortune, 2/16/91
fractious “The fractious couple received a tongue lashing from Judge Judy.” Arnold
Feigenbaum, “Television Justice?”
frail “This frail woman has the strength to work where the strong turn away.” “Mother
Teresa,” New Republic, 10/16/97
fraught “Ev’ry sigh comes forth so fraught with sweets, ’Tis incense to be offered to a god.”
Nathaniel Lee, The Rival Queens
fray “To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast, Fits a dull fighter and a keen
guest.” William Shakespeare, Henry IV
frenetic “There is no place more frenetic than a newspaper office when a major story is
breaking.” Herbert Brucker, Journalist
frenzy “They had a sense of the wildest adventure, which mounted to frenzy, when some men
rose on the shore and shouted to them, ‘Hello, there! What are you doing with that boat?’ ”
William Dean Howells, A Boy’s Town
fretful “When Mike Nichols directed ‘Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?’ Warner Bros. was
fretful, worrying about the Legion of Decency.” Liz Smith, “Century’s Choice,” New York
Post, 6/23/99
frugal “He was famously frugal—‘so tight he damn near squeaked’ says a colleague.” Eric
Pooley, “How George Got His Groove,” TIME, 6/21/99
fruitless “Since launching a diplomatic shuttle, the Russian envoy had spent dozens of
fruitless hours with the Yugoslav dictator.” Johanna McGeary, “Why He Blinked,” TIME,
6/14/99
frustrated “I will not be frustrated by reality.” Ray Bradbury, Forever and the Earth
fulsome “I was appreciative of his sincere and fulsome praise.” Ruth McKinney, “A Loud
Sneer for Our Feathered Friends”
furtive “Hogan directed a furtive glance up and down the alley.” John Steinbeck, “How Mr.
Hogan Robbed a Bank”
futility “Resistance to changes in English language rules often ends in futility.” Bill Bryson,
Mother Tongue
galvanize “While he could not galvanize an audience, he could make them think.” George
Jean Nathan, House of Satan
gamut “At one end of the gamut of slang’s humor is what Oliver Wendell Holmes called ‘the
blank checks of a bankrupt mind.’” Bergen Evans, “Now Everyone is Hip About Slang”
garbled “A garbled account of the matter that had reached his colleagues led to some gentle
ribbing.” H. G. Wells, “The Man Who Could Work Miracles”
garrulous “The more he drank, the more garrulous he became, until he suddenly seemed to
fade out.” Lawrence O’Brien, W. C. Fields
gaudy “This computer drawing program permits children to express themselves in the most
gaudy art they can imagine.” Working Mother, 5/96
gaunt “Her gaunt expression was mistaken for weakness of spirit, whereas it told the sad
story of her life.” George Eliot, Middle March
genocide “Accounts of the destruction of masses of people recall that genocide is an ancient
practice.” Otto Friedrich, Before the Deluge
genre “There is a certain difference between a work called a romance and the genre known as
the novel.” Nathaniel Hawthorne
germane “In assigning ratings to films, is it not germane to consider the nature and extent of
violence shown?” The Hollywood Reporter, 5/19/97
gesticulating “‘Three times’ was still all he could say, in his thick, angry voice, gesticulating
at the commissaire and glaring at me.” Francis Steegmuller, “The Foreigner”
gist “The gist of it is . . . love is a great beautifier.” Louisa May Alcott, Little Women
gleaned “I gleaned what I could from college, but independent reading soon broadened my
horizons.” I. F. Stone, Weekly Reader
glib “It is not glib to maintain that truth can never be contained in one creed.” Mary Augusta
Ward, Robert Elsmere
gratuity “What form of gratuity would compensate his informer ’s key bit of information?”
Dashiell Hammett, Red Harvest
gregariousness “We will take with us one thing alone that exists among porpoises as among
men; an ingrained gregariousness.” Loren Eiseley, “Man and Porpoise”
grimace “When informed of the death of his best friend, he was unemotional, not a grimace
marred his face.” James Jones, The Thin Red Line
grotesque “Nowadays, men have to work, and women to marry for money; it’s a dreadfully
grotesque world.” Louisa May Alcott, Little Women
guise “Freedom is not worth fighting for, if, under its guise, one tries to get as much as he can
for himself.” Dorothy Canfield Fisher, Seasoned Timber
gullible “‘Charles the horse was wonderful!’ cried a gullible goose.” James Thurber, “What
Happened to Charles”
gusto “Ali faced each fight with supreme confidence and challenged his opponents with wit
and gusto.” “His Greatest Challenge,” Sports Illustrated, 5/5/97
habitat “Billy begins to be happy about life only in an artificial but cozy habitat on another
planet.” William Bly, Barron’s Book Notes, Slaughterhouse Five by Kurt Vonnegut
halcyon “The halcyon days we recall with pleasure had many clouded moments.” Wolcott
Gibbs, New Yorker, 4/8/49
hapless “Parents, too, have an almost irresistible impulse to mold their children in their own
image or at least graft a few of their own ambitions onto their hapless offspring.” Arthur
Gordon, “The Neglected Art of Being Different”
harassing “Over the next weeks came more amendments and harassing tactics including a
motion to postpone selection of a new capital.” Carl Sandburg, Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie
Years
harbingers “It is easy enough to find harbingers of the episode in the early coverage of Mrs.
Dole’s candidacy.” TIME, 5/24/99
haven “The desire to escape the city has filtered down into every other economic group, and
as a result of the suburb’s popularity, that haven of refuge is itself filling up.” Lewis
Mumford, “The Roaring Traffic’s Boom”
havoc “Excessive sensitiveness plays havoc with children’s nerves.” Guy De Maupassant,
“Looking Back”
heinous “All crimes against a whole people are measured by the heinous ones carried out by
Hitler.” Civilization, 12/99
heresy “Calvin had written that heresy was not an evil, deserving death.” Herbert Brucker,
Journalist
heterogeneous “The family is heterogeneous enough to make quite a good party in itself.”
Rose Macauley, The World My Wilderness
hirsute “The difference between this rock concert and one 10 years earlier is the marked
decrease in hirsute young men.” TIME, 8/8/99
histrionics “Bobby Valentine’s histrionics will be irrelevant, because Rule 51 states that any
manager who is ejected must remain in the clubhouse until the game is over.” Jack Curry,
“Valentine is Suspended and Fined,” New York Times, 6/11/99
hoard “Many people give freely of their affections while you hoard yours.” Joseph Conrad,
Victory
hoax “Frank Spencer, an anthropologist who rummaged through the bones of controversy to
theorize about the identity of the mastermind behind the Piltdown Man hoax of 1912, died on
Sunday.” Obituary notice, New York Times, 6/12/99
homogeneous “Archaeologists have unearthed evidence showing that the people of ancient
Egypt were far from a homogeneous civilization.” Brian Fagan, Time Detective
hostile “He might commit some hostile act, attempt to strike me or choke me.” Jack London,
White Fang
humility “Early in life I had to choose between arrogance and humility; I chose arrogance.”
Frank Lloyd Wright
hyperbole “It is not hyperbole to state that, most terribly, justice and judgment lie often a
world apart.” Emmeline Pankhurst, My Own Story
iconoclast “He was an iconoclast about everything, except his love of money.” Garry Wills,
syndicated newspaper column, 3/8/79
idyllic “The brilliant Hawaiian sunrise beckons you to a great breakfast as your tour of the
idyllic islands begins.” Brochure for Perillo Tours
ignominious “Henry Clay had ambition to become president, but he faced an ignominious
series of setbacks.” H. Foner, Failed Candidates
ilk “‘That’s the standard line,’ Ron said, ‘as promoted by some Japanese businessmen and
American spokesmen of their ilk.’” Michael Crichton, Rising Sun
imbibe “I got up and went downstairs and into the kitchen to imbibe my first cup of coffee
before going to the barn.” Glenway Wescott, The Breath of Bulls
imminent “I admired the easy confidence with which my chief loped from side to side of his
wheel and trimmed the ship so closely that disaster seemed ceaselessly imminent.” Mark
Twain, Life on the Mississippi
impeccable “That is why the so-called ‘better’ juvenile books, skillfully constructed, morally
sanitary, psychologically impeccable—don’t really make much of a dent on the child’s
consciousness.” Clifton Fadiman, “My Life is an Open Book”
impede “Judge Jones has become known for her anger at defense lawyers who try to impede
executions through legal maneuvers.” David Firestone, “Death Penalty Conference,” New York
Times, 8/19/99
imperative “But unlike the others, Mrs. Hassan had yet another imperative: her son Huseyin
has leukemia and needs blood.” Edmund L. Andrews, “I Cannot Die,” New York Times, 8/19/99
imperceptibly “In the two decades since W. Ugams had come to Boston, his status had
imperceptibly shifted.” John Updike, New Yorker, 10/22/60
imperturbable “The Prince de Ligne had given the Empress Catherine the name of
imperturbable, or immoveable.” Walter Tooke, The Life of Catherine
impetuous “He displayed the impetuous vivacity of youth.” Samuel Johnson, “The Rambler”
No. 27
impious “The Sunis regard the Shias as impious heretics.” Matthew Arnold, Essays in
Criticism
implacable “It seemed folly for this young man to hope to create a self-supporting farm in
such an implacable environment.” Leland Stowe, Crusoe of Lonesome Lake
implored “No beggars implored Scrooge to bestow a trifle, no children asked him what it was
o’clock.” Charles Dickens, A Christmas Carol
importuned “Many businessmen were importuned to come to Washington.” John McDonald,
On Capitol Hill
impresario “He was an egregious impresario of letters who kept a squad of writers churning
out copy marketed under his signature.” C. J. Rolo, No Business Like Show Business [adapted]
impromptu “At an impromptu airport news conference, Gov. Bush declined to respond
directly to questions about his experience with drugs.” Associated Press Report, “Next
Question, Please,” 6/5/99
imprudent “We are not so imprudent as to destroy the bees that work for us.” Robert Tanner,
Principles of Agriculture
impunity “Swaraj means that not a single Hindu or Mussulman shall for a moment crush with
impunity meek Hindus or Mussulmans.” Mohandas K. Gandhi, “The Untouchables”
inadvertently “In our report on NASCAR RACING, we inadvertently attributed a quote to
Doris O’Bryant.” Correction made by TIME editors, 6/21/99
inane “When left with nothing to talk about, people resort to inane remarks about the
weather.” Lawrence Kaminer, “A World of Strangers”
inanimate “We assumed that the inanimate body in the rubble was dead but the dog, trained to
distinguish between live and dead bodies, knew better.” Stephen Kinzer, “Turkish Earthquake
Relief,” New York Times, 8/21/99
incapacitated “His searing empathy for the parents of incapacitated clients is a product of the
still-raw pain over the 1980 suicide of his younger brother.” Jan Hoffman, “Public Lives,”
New York Times, 6/18/99
inchoate “The general plan is inchoate and incoherent and the particular treatments
disconnected.” Hillary Corke, Global Economy
incipient “As columnist Jack Anderson was about to write about the Secretary of State’s
incipient departure, Al Haig panicked.” William Safire, “On Language,” New York Times,
6/20/99
incisive “Your hands are keen, your mind incisive, your sensitivity deep, your vision well
honed.” Thomas A. Dooley, “To a Young Doctor”
inclement “The inclement weather that has given us fits recently is over, and I’m looking for
blue skies for all of next week.” Weather forecast from ABC’s Sam Champion, Eyewitness
News, 6/23/99
incoherent “So seldom do editors get what they think they want that they tend to become
incoherent in their insistent repetition of their needs.” Jerome Weidman, “Back Talk”
incompatible “Once men tried to reach heaven by building a tower, and I made their formats
incompatible.” Garrison Keillor, “Faith at the Speed of Light,” TIME, 6/14/99
incongruous “He was clothed with tatters of old ship’s canvas: and this extraordinary
patchwork was held together by a system of various and incongruous fastenings.” Robert
Louis Stevenson, Treasure Island
incontrovertible “The Wilsons lived in a universe of words linked into an incontrovertible
firmament by two centuries of Calvinist divines.” John Dos Passos, U.S.A.
incredulous “The Nazi war on cancer?—other readers may be as incredulous as I was when
this book came to my attention.” Michael Sherry, New York Times, 5/23/99
incumbent “As a Muslim, the Director of Interfaith Affairs for the Islamic Center said that it
is incumbent on him to actively engage others in the service of Allah.” Jioni Palmer, “Vigil to
Address Growing Violence,” Newsday, 10/10/99
indict “You can’t indict a whole nation, particularly on such vague grounds as these were.”
Robert M. Coates, “The Law”
indifference “David sees Ham who, although now shows indifference to life, swims out to
save people from a shipwreck.” Holly Hughes, Barron’s Book Notes, David Copperfield by
Charles Dickens
indigenous “A MacArthur Foundation grant was given to Dennis A. Moore for helping to
preserve the language and culture of indigenous groups in Brazil.” Announcement of
MacArthur Grants, 6/23/99
indigent “The bill would make modest improvements in the way that counsel is provided for
indigent defendants.” Bob Herbert, “Defending the Status Quo,” New York Times, 6/17/99
indiscriminate “The indiscriminate spraying of pesticides add a new chapter, a new kind of
havoc.” Rachel Carson, Silent Spring
indoctrinated “Teachers have indoctrinated students in practical subjects like home ec.”
Jodie Morse, “Hitched in Home Room,” TIME, 6/21/99
indolent “This indolent weather turns a student’s thoughts toward last-minute truancy.” Darcy
Frey, “The Last Shot”
inebriated “Red Skelton’s inebriated clown who was guzzling Smuggler ’s Gin is one of the
all-time great comedy sketches.” Paul De Simone, “They Made Us Laugh” [adapted]
ineffectual “Medicare officials told the White House that the proposed drug plan is unrealistic
and would be ineffectual.” Robert Pear, “Drug Plan Worries Democrats,” New York Times,
6/25/99
inert “The Japanese drifted inert in his life jacket watching 449 approach until the bow
crossed in front of him.” Robert J. Donovan, PT 109
inevitable “The ‘High Occupancy Vehicle’ lanes were an attempt to avoid the otherwise
inevitable traffic delays on the Expressway.” Newsday, 9/23/99
inexorably “Note that it is all in one long sentence, developing inexorably like the slow decay
of our lives.” Clifton Fadiman, “They Have Their Exits and Their Entrances”
infallible “He had an infallible ear for the way people spoke, and he imitated them in his
writing.” Reader’s Encyclopedia
infamous “The unsubstantiated computer rumors for which the Internet is infamous began
flowing within hours of the arrival of Jan. 1 in Asia.” Barnaby Feder, “Internet’s Cheering
Squad Nervously Watches Clock,” New York Times, 1/1/00
infraction “Order cannot be secured through fear of punishment for an infraction against a
political entity.” Supreme Court Justice William Brennan, decision, 10/64
ingratiate “This tax was abolished by Richard III to ingratiate himself with the people.” Sir
Francis Bacon, Henry VII
inherent “Harvey lacked graduate degrees but his inherent knowledge of human nature
enabled him to be successful as a personnel manager.” “Rungs on the Corporate Ladder,”
American Management Association brochure
inhibition “With all this ‘inhibition’ stuff and Freudian approach and ‘group play,’ you get the
distinct impression that people are actually afraid of their kids.” William Michelfelder, The
Fun of Doing Nothing
iniquity “I lack iniquity Sometime to do me service.” William Shakespeare, Othello
initiate “The Russian army seems ready to initiate a new offensive against the defenders of
the capital of Chechnya.” New York Post, 1/10/00
innate “Nothing makes the weak strong or the fearful brave as much as our bodies’ innate
drive to stay alive.” William Safire, “Why Die?,” New York Times, 1/1/00
innocuous “Howell’s seemingly innocuous remark about Tanya’s footware led to a torrent of
curses from the petite brunette.” George Sokolsky, “Very Thin Ice”
inordinate “Was it, perhaps, because his back had broken under his inordinate burden?” I. L.
Peretz, “Buntcheh the Silent”
insatiable “One needs an insatiable curiosity to succeed in the new technical world-wide
spread of information.” Jared Diamond, “Guns, Germs, and Steel”
insidious “For them, civilization is an insidious but no less sure and deadly poison.”
Hernando Bates, Central America
integral “Let Office 2000 be an integral part of your productivity tools.” Newspaper ad for
Microsoft Office 2000
interjected “The accountant interjected, saying that you can buy a better house in New Jersey
than on Long Island for the same money.” Ken Moritsugu, “Nowhere to Build,” Newsday,
6/25/99
interlopers “Indeed, the magazine managers are treated as foreign interlopers.” Michael
Woolf, “Tribune and Tribulation,” New York, 7/5/99
interminably “In his clean white shirt and blue jeans, with one hand resting carelessly on the
black box, he seemed very proper and important as he talked interminably to Mr. Graves and
the Martins.” Shirley Jackson, “The Lottery”
internecine “Eight thousand zealots stabbed each other in internecine massacre.” L. H. Farrar,
Early Christians
interrogate “The District Attorney of Nassau County is set to interrogate a Malverne police
officer who was arrested on shoplifting charges.” Associated Press report, New York Times,
8/20/99
intimidate “New language could target loiterers with no apparent purpose other than to
intimidate others from entering those areas.” Margaret Hornblower, “Ending the Roundups,”
TIME, 6/21/99
intrepid “Scientists and support staff began celebrating the new year along with a planeload
of tourists and seven intrepid skiers.” Malcolm Browne, “Absence of Midnight Doesn’t
Darken Spirits,” New York Times, 1/1/00
intrinsic “We appear to have lost the belief that honesty is an intrinsic aspect of political
leadership.” Editorial, Christian Science Monitor, 5/17/98
introspective “All had the thin, narrow faces and large, wide-open eyes—introspective eyes.”
Ivan Cankar, “Children and Old Folk”
inundated “We do know that the moon’s surface has not been eroded by wind or rain or ice
or snow and has not been inundated by oceans, lakes or rivers.” Lee A. DuBridge, “Sense and
Nonsense About Space”
invalidate “Some Reagan and Bush appointees have proved far too willing to invalidate
decisions made by Congress and the Executive branch.” Cass R. Sunstein, New York Times,
6/2/99
invective “I watched him walk into the clubhouse, kick a bench and break a toe, never once
stopping the flow of invective.” Jack Altshul, “Why Should the Other Guy Beat Me?”
inveighed “The County Executive inveighed against scofflaws who owe a total of $60
million.” Television news broadcast, CBS, 6/23/99
inveterate “The inveterate Boston Red Sox fan faces seemingly endless disappointment.”
Peter Balakian, “Black Dogs of Fate”
inviolable “The coach broke an inviolable rule by striking one of his players.” Don DeLillo,
End Zone
irascible “He became so irascible that within six months he lost his wife and half of his office
staff.” Herman Wouk, Don’t Stop the Carnival
irate “I got irate because people have been yelling at me my whole life.” Olivia Winslow,
“Cop Tells of a Confession,” Newsday, 6/23/99
irrational “He became irrational and threatened to commit suicide.” Darcy Frey, “The Last
Shot”
irrelevant “What has existed in the past seems to him not only not authoritative, but
irrelevant, inferior, and outworn.” George Santayana, Character and Opinion in the United
States
itinerant “Hamlet greeted the group of itinerant actors and made them part of a plan to trap
Claudius.” Barron’s Educational Series, Book Notes
jaunty “The cadet was very trim in his red breeches and blue tunic, his white gloves spotless,
his white cockade jaunty, his heart in his mouth.” Alexander Woolcott, “Entrance Fee”
jeopardized “Cancellation of the event would have jeopardized the financial survival of the
organization.” Nat Hentoff, “Picket Lines are Labor ’s Free Speech,” Village Voice, 6/15/99
jettison “He refused to jettison any of the manners and behavior that made him seem so odd.”
William Connor, Daily Mirror, London, 1956
jocose “He caught the sound of jocose talk and ringing laughter from behind the hedges.”
George Eliot, Adam Bede
jostled “When the squeege man jostled him, the police officer said that he feared for his life.”
Kit Roane, “Squeege Man Scared Him,” New York Times, 6/25/99
jubilant “When he finally reached Boston, he received a jubilant welcome.” Keith Ayling,
“Race Around the World”
jurisdiction “Lee’s jurisdiction included the monitoring of boxing within New Jersey.”
Timothy Smith, “A Sport’s Credibility,” New York Times, 6/20/99
juxtaposed “Theatrical vignettes are juxtaposed through alternating verses in clever boy-girl
counterpoint.” “Hot ’N Cole,” Newsday, 6/4/99
labyrinth “He himself was so lost in the labyrinth of his own unquiet thoughts that I did not
exist.” Daphne Du Maurier, Rebecca
lacerations “He pressed only the already tired horse at such speed that his spurs made
lacerations in its sides, and at last the poor animal died.” Honore De Balzac, A Passion in the
Desert
lackluster “The major reason for the lackluster look in their eyes was their discovery it is
now possible to drive across the face of the nation without feeling you’ve been anywhere or
that you’ve done anything.” John Keats, “The Call of the Open Road”
laconic “The dialogue is clipped, laconic, understated to convey simmering underneath.” John
Simon, “The Worst Noël,” New York, 6/21/99
lampoon “Many new TV shows succeed because they lampoon the behavior of teenagers.”
John Leonard, New York, 10/15/97
landmarks “The remarkable trees formed good landmarks by which the place might easily be
found again.” Washington Irving, “The Devil and Tom Walker”
largess “A largess universal like the sun, His liberal eye doth give to every one.” William
Shakespeare, Henry IV
lassitude “To poets it’s vernal lassitude but to us it’s simply spring fever.” Brochure, Fort
Lauderdale Chamber of Commerce
latent “All our latent strength was now alive.” Winston Churchill, Their Finest Hour
laudable “American historians, in their eagerness to present facts and their laudable anxiety
to tell the truth, have neglected the literary aspects of their craft.” Samuel Eliot Morrison, By
Land and by Sea
lax “The fact that his employer was lax on this score was one of many things that he had to
condone.” Henry James, “Brooksmith”
legerdemain “Federal investigators pursuing money-laundering schemes are concerned with
alleged acts of legerdemain by Russian banks.” Tim L. O’Brien, “Bank in Laundering
Inquiry,” New York Times, 8/20/99
legion “Though not Hollywood handsome, Tommy’s success with the fair sex was legion.”
Janet Murphy, “Babylon on the Hudson”
lethal “By evening we couldn’t even get any more people indoors where they would have had
some protection from the lethal fallout.” Florence Moog, “The Bombing of St. Louis”
lethargic “Ricky Henderson’s lethargic stroll toward second base led the sports reporters to
blast him in yesterday’s papers.” Ralph Kiner, baseball announcer, Fox Sports News, 10/4/99
levity “There was something about the company’s president that made levity seem out of
place.” Lloyd Sperling, A Boiler Room Operation
libel “Issues such as freedom of speech and libel are going to have to be rethought as the
Internet makes everyone a potential publisher in cyberspace.” Thomas L. Friedman, “Boston
E-Party,” New York Times, 1/1/00
liquidation “Hiding the forty-six comrades who were scheduled for liquidation became much
easier.” David Hackett, The Buchenwald Report
lithe “Tasteless headlines screamed ‘Newtie’s Cutie’ to describe the lithe hymn-singing young
staff member who inexplicably fell for her portly Newt.” Robert Reno, “Political Garbage,”
Newsday, 8/19/99
livid “Livid with anger, the poster boy for road rage jumped out of his red convertible and
came running toward us.” Letter to the Editor, “Big Road Hazard,” Newsday, 8/19/99
loath “Still I am loath simply to join the conspiracy.” “The Happy-Parents Conspiracy,” New
York Times, 5/23/99
loathing “He had braced himself not to become entangled in her loathing for him.” Phillip
Roth, American Pastoral
longevity “The longevity of metal parts is increased by this new process.” Report, General
Motors Corporation
lucrative “Very quickly it became a surprisingly lucrative property.” David McCullough, The
Great Bridge
lugubrious “Lugubrious notices on the passing of old friends were a feature of the local
paper.” TIME, 8/20/99
lurid “We thought the rookie’s tale was too lurid to be believed, but it turned out to be true.”
Chuck Cavanna, Life in the Minors
lush “Can one run for political office without the promise of lush campaign contributions
from many sources?” “Steve Forbes; In His Own Debt,” Parade, 9/15/99
Machiavellian “Is there any clearer example of Machiavellian plotting than that of Iago in
‘Othello’?” John Simon, Reverse Angle
magnanimous “There was no way he was going to be magnanimous and share this prized
baseball with anyone who claimed a share of the glory.” Don DeLillo, Underworld
maimed “Films in which characters are maimed or destroyed seem to be most popular with
today’s youngsters.” Harold Owen, Jr., “The Motion Picture”
maladjusted “The natural assumption is that the teenage killers at Columbine H.S. were
maladjusted youngsters but some neighbors denied that.” Letters to the Editor, Washington
Post, 7/14/99
malady “Homesickness can be a disease as trivial as a slight cold or it can be a deadly
malady.” Z. Libin, “A Sign of Summer”
malevolent “Our military action against the malevolent head of the Serbian government has
finally ended.” Newsweek, 4/8/99
malign “His chosen weapon is the verbal hand grenade by which he can outrage and malign.”
Kenneth Tynan, “On Don Rickles,” New Yorker, 2/20/78
malignant “The wailing chorus turned into a malignant clamor that swirled into my ears like
an icy breeze.” Kenneth Roberts, Oliver Wiswell
malleable “Is the mayor able to change from an apparently rigid personality to one more
malleable to differences?” Alec Kuczynski, “The Mayor’s Makeover,” New York Times
Magazine, 8/1/99
malnutrition “The children of the Albanian refugees are suffering from malnutrition, and
they need our help.” Red Cross Appeal for Funds
mammoth “She began to repair the ravages made by generosity added to love—a tremendous
task, dear friends—a mammoth task.” O. Henry, “The Gift of the Magi”
mandate “With a federal mandate to convert to digital broadcasting by 2003, public TV
stations are facing large capital expenditures.” Ellis Bromberg, “Federal Money Vital to
Progress of PBS,” The News Gazette, Champaign-Urbana, 10/21/99
manifest “English is one of the great borrowing languages, more manifest in the origin of so
many of our words.” Bill Bryson, Mother Tongue
manifold “China’s Xinhua News Agency treated manifold claims of procedural error with
disbelief.” “Trying to Build Bridges in China,” TIME, 6/28/99
martinet “The prospect of having to talk to Sheila’s principal, a real martinet, made him
nervous, but he steeled himself to do it.” John Yount, “The Trapper ’s Last Shot”
masticate “Trying to masticate a huge hamburger with an open mouth is a no-no.” Advice
from Ms. Manners, syndicated columnist, 6/4/98
mastiffs “That island of England breeds very valiant creatures; their mastiffs are of
unmatchable courage.” William Shakespeare, Henry V
materialism “Democracy always makes for materialism, because the only kind of equality that
you can guarantee to a whole people is physical.” Katherine F. Gerould, Modes and Morals
matrons “For ladies they had the family of the American consul and a nice bevy of English
girls and matrons, perhaps Lady Hamilton herself.” Edward Everett Hale, The Man Without a
Country
maudlin “Uncle Billy passed rapidly into a state of stupor, the Duchess became maudlin, and
Mother Shipton snored.” Bret Harte, “The Outcasts of Poker Flat”
megalomania “Charlie desperately wanted Armaxco to lease space in what so far was the
worst mistake of his career, the soaring monster that his megalomania led him to call Croker
Concourse.” Tom Wolfe, A Man in Full
mendacious “Hillary joined in efforts to dismiss as mendacious tarts all the women who
claimed to have been involved with her husband.” Maureen Dowd, “The Boy Can’t Help It,”
New York Times, 8/4/99
menial “It is difficult to visualize the numbers of menial laborers required to build the famous
Egyptian pyramids.” E. A. Wallis Budge, The Mummy
mentor “To break into the political life of South Africa, one needed a highly placed mentor.”
Nadine Gordimer, Face to Face
mercenary “We all like money . . . but Dickens surpassed most in a mercenary approach to his
writings.” G. K. Chesterton, Charles Dickens
metamorphosis “For nearly a year, the dauber, undergoing metamorphosis, inhabits its silken
dung-stoppered cocoon inside the mud cell.” Alan Devoe, “The Mad Dauber”
meticulous “Even later, in 1992, Barnstead’s meticulous records allowed researchers to put
names on six previously unidentified Titanic survivors.” “Titanic and Halifax,” The Nova
Scotia Museum
mien “He had the mien of a man who has been everywhere and through everything.” Arnold
Bennett, The Old Wives Tale
milieu “In the milieu of a heated baseball championship contest, tickets are being sold at
highly inflated prices.” New York Post, 10/10/99
modified “Some schools claimed that the standard test was a lot harder than a modified
version.” Ching-Cheng Ni, “Fewer Rumbles on Earth Test,” Newsday, 6/23/99
mollify “The mayor attempted to mollify his critics by pointing to the increased safety in the
city.” New York Daily News, 8/15/99
monolithic “Gertrude Stein was a stolid, heavy presence, monolithic, unladylike.” Liz Smith,
“When Love Was the Adventure,” TIME, 6/14/99
moribund “After being moribund for years, interest in electric automobiles has revived.” Car
and Driver, 6/97
mortality “Socrates loves talk of fundamental things, of justice and virtue and wisdom and
love and mortality.” Hermann Hagedorn, Socrates—His Life
mortify “The comparisons between her sister’s beauty and her own no longer would mortify
her.” Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice
motivate “The loss of our star quarterback seemed to motivate the team to play even harder.”
Bill Parcells quoted in Sports Illustrated, 9/12/98
mundane “Why bother with mundane musings when you can sit on the lawn and build cities
out of grass clippings?” Enid Nemy, “The World is Her Cloister,” New York Times, 6/20/99
munificent “His munificent gift will enable us to place computers in all the elementary
schools.” Newsday, 6/20/98
murky “Mud dumping from the bottom of Long Island has created a murky picture.”
“Fishermen’s Woes,” Newsday, 6/22/99
myriad “Genius is not born with sight, but blind: it is influenced by a myriad of stimulating
exterior circumstances.” Mark Twain, “Saint Joan of Arc”
nadir “He knew he had reached the nadir of his baseball career when they sent him to a minor
league team.” Roger Kahn, The Boys of Summer
naïve “Woodrow Wilson was naïve to believe Yugoslavia could be formed after World War
I.” Letter to the Editor, New Yorker, 6/26/99
nascent “The once nascent Women’s National Basketball Association has arrived and is
healthy and prosperous.” New York Times, 7/17/99
nebulous “There is a nebulous line between confidence and over-confidence.” Editorial, Wall
Street Journal, 4/8/99
nefarious “A nefarious employee can still download secret weapons information to a tape, put
it in his pocket and walk out the door.” William Safire, “Culture of Arrogance,” New York
Times, 6/17/99
negligible “These politicians have voted themselves a big pay raise for the negligible amount
of work they do.” The Queens Tribune, 8/6/98
nepotism “Political allies and family members filled government jobs as nepotism
flourished.” Paul Alter, This Windy City
nettled “He was pretty well nettled by this time, and he stood in front of a bureau mirror,
brushing his hair with a pair of military brushes.” James Thurber, “More Alarms at Night”
neurotic “We shall lose all our power to cope with our problem if we allow ourselves to
become a stagnant, neurotic, frightened and suspicious people.” Walter Lippmann, “The
Nuclear Age”
neutralize “The quinine that can neutralize his venom is called courage.” Elmer Davis, But
We Were Born Free
nirvana “Nirvana is in putting your child to sleep, and in writing the last line of your poem.”
Kahlil Gilbran, Sand and Foam
noisome “The noisome conditions in the refugee camps were a disgrace and a danger.”
Newsday, 8/7/99
nomadic “After buying the big trailer, they spent a nomadic year visiting national parks out
west.” “On the Road Again,” Travel Ideas International
nominal “As the nominal head of his party, the governor was courted by all the Sunday
morning talk shows.” Archer Karnes, “Politics and Poker”
nondescript “Jane Austen can picture ordinary, commonplace and nondescript characters in
ways denied to me.” Walter Scott, Journal, 1826
nonentity “With sufficient financial backing, almost any political nonentity could become a
national contender.” Washington Post, 6/15/98
nostalgia “The various objects one picks up just before leaving a foreign country are apt to
acquire an extraordinary souvenir-value, giving one a foretaste of distance and nostalgia.”
Corrado Alvaro, “The Ruby”
nuance “With Minnie Driver adroitly mining each nuance of social primness, Jane is the first
Disney cartoon heroine to provide her own comic relief.” Richard Corliss, “Him Tarzan, Him
Great,” TIME, 6/14/99
nullify “Allowing our parks to decay is a sure way to nullify the beauty given to us by nature.”
Freeman Tilden, The National Parks
nurtured “The Telecommunications Act of 1996 introduced competition that has nurtured
demand for communications generally and for Internet service specifically.” Seth Schessel,
“A Chance to Become Really Big,” New York Times, 6/15/99
nutritive “They searched for anything that had nutritive value, but often found nothing.” “The
Irish Famine,” Harpers, 5/73
obese “The rush to lose weight by unproven methods often leads to complications for obese
people.” Johns Hopkins Health Letter, Summer 1997
obliterate “They went out to survey the land for a possible railroad, but met with Indians on
the warpath and were obliterated.” Freeman Tilden, The National Parks [adapted]
obloquy “Hitler and his Nazis showed how evil a conspiracy could be which was aimed at
destroying a race by exposing it to contempt, derision, and obloquy.” Supreme Court Justice
William O. Douglas, decision, 10/52
obscure “This book has serious purpose even if many will find that purpose obscure.”
Decision of Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, 11/62
obsequious “and the survivor bound In filial obligation for some term To do obsequious
sorrow.” William Shakespeare, Hamlet
obsess “To obsess over acquisitions is especially damaging to human felicity.” Llewelyn
Powys, Earth Memories
obsolescence “After five centuries of obsolescence, Roman numerals still exert a peculiar
fascination over the inquiring mind.” Isaac Asimov, “Nothing Counts”
obviate “Modest pre-emptive acting can obviate the need for more drastic actions at a later
date that could destabilize the economy.” Alan Greenspan, quoted in New Jersey Star Ledger,
5/6/99
occult “Somehow, horror films have changed from one main figure who threatens a town or
young women, to occult spirits that take over a normal human for unknown reasons.” Pauline
Kael, I Lost It at the Movies
octogenarian “Octogenarian film and stage director Elia Kazan received a mixed reception
when he came up to collect his Lifetime Achievement Award.” Associated Press report, 4/7/98
ominous “There was a Sabbath lull in the air, which, in a settlement unused to Sabbath
influences, looked ominous.” Bret Harte, “The Outcasts of Poker Flat”
omnipotent “In those comic strips there was always a cruel and omnipotent villain.” Letter,
New York Times, 9/13/99
omnivorous “He became an omnivorous reader of the classics.” T. S. Lovering, Child
Prodigies
opprobrium “General Sherman is still viewed with opprobrium in these parts of the South he
once destroyed.” Edmund Wilson, Patriotic Gore
opulent “Poirot followed him, looking with appreciation at such works of art as were of an
opulent and florid nature.” Agatha Christie, “The Dream”
originated “The early Egyptian rulers, in order to stop the practice of cannibalism,
originated the method that protected the dead—mummification.” E. A. Wallis Budge, The
Mummy
ostensibly “The race was ostensibly to test the reliability of the automobiles.” Keith Ayling,
The Race Around the World
ostentatious “He affected simplicity, partly because he was ugly, but more because being
ostentatious might have irritated those of whom he always spoke of as ‘my fellow citizens.’”
Emil Ludwig, Michelangelo
oust “Politics will still exist as in the Republican campaign to oust Bill Clinton.” James
Pinkerton, “Mediocre Pols,” Newsday, 6/17/99
overt “It is peculiarly shocking that Brutus practices overt self-deception.” Harold Bloom,
Shakespeare
pall “A pall had descended upon Mr. Timberlake, and I understood why he did not talk to me
about the origin of evil.” V. S. Pritchett, “The Saint”
palliate “Reducing the testosterone would palliate the cancer, the oncologist believed, but it
wouldn’t be a cure.” Dr. Mervyn Elliot, “Medicine in the News”
paltry “Marvin was baffled by the paltry amount of money the widow was asking for her
husband’s elegant Rolls Royce.” Barnett Lesser, “One Man’s Will”
panaceas “Mrs. Clinton said that she was in Rochester to listen and learn not to offer
panaceas for all civic problems.” Associated Press report, “Pre-Campaign Strategy,” 9/9/99
pandemonium “Then, summoning the wild courage of despair, in pandemonium, a throng of
revellers at once threw themselves into the black apartment.” Edgar Allan Poe, “The Masque
of the Red Death”
parable “When I had trouble keeping the kindergarten class quiet, I found that telling them a
parable (the tortoise and the hare, for example) would get their undivided attention.” Lana L.
Grossberg, A Teacher’s True Confessions
paradox “Here was a paradox like the stellar universe that fitted one’s mental faults.” Henry
Adams, The Education of Henry Adams
paragon “An angel! or, if not An earthly paragon!” William Shakespeare, Cymbeline
paramount “For him, winning was paramount; coming in second meant he had swum a poor
race.” Len Sussman, “Born to Swim”
pariahs “Apart from the other castes were the outcasts: India’s untouchables, or pariahs.”
Barbara Walker, Women’s Encyclopedia
paroxysms “The coughing did not even come out in paroxysms, but was just a feeble, dreadful
welling up of the juices of organic dissolution.” Thomas Mann, The Magic Mountain
parsimonious “His parsimonious thrift was relieved by a few generous impulses.” V. L.
Parrington, Main Currents in American Thought
passé “Everything old is new again is the theme for the designer ’s adoption of passé styles
and making them fashionable again.” Sophia Leguizamo, “New From Milan”
pathetic “He is the latest loser trying to solve his pathetic life behind a gun.” Editorial, New
York Post, 7/30/99
paucity “In the dictator ’s best-case scenario, he can hope for continuing control, thanks to a
paucity of opponents.” Massimo Calabresi, “Is This the End for Milosevic?,” TIME, 6/21/99
pecuniary “The most unpleasant thing of all was that his pecuniary interests should enter into
the question of his reconciliation with his wife.” Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina
pedagogue “He is neither bandit nor pedagogue, but, like myself a broken soldier, retired on
half pay for some years.” Stephen Vincent Benet, “The Curfew Tolls”
penance “I have done penance for condemning Love, Whose high imperious thoughts have
punished me With bitter fasts, with penitential groans.” William Shakespeare, The Two
Gentlemen of Verona
penchant “Annabel had a penchant for silver fox coats but Midge said they were common.”
Dorothy Parker, “The Standard of Living”
penitent “When father strode into the coal and ice office, he came out, the penitent clerk with
him, promising to deliver a block of ice in time for dinner.” Clarence Day, Life with Father
pensive “It was only when he found himself alone in his bedroom in a pensive mood that he
was able to grapple seriously with his memories of the occurrence.” H. G. Wells, The Man
Who Could Work Miracles
penury “Afflicted by penury, it appeared that Putois had joined a gang of thieves who were
prowling the countryside.” Anatole France, “Putois”
perceive “The subjects, as you perceive, were alarming but very agreeable.” Anton Chekhov,
“A Slander”
peregrination “Each step he took represented an inward peregrination.” Gretel Ehrlich, “On
the Road With God’s Fool”
peremptory “Mr. Greenspan encouraged his fellow Federal Reserve Board members today to
undertake a peremptory attack against inflation.” Reuters, “Financial News Letter,” 3/99
perfidious “Alfred E. Ricks was the perfidious toad’s designation who sold worthless shares
in the Blue Gopher Mine.” O. Henry, “The Man Higher Up”
perfunctory “Doc Martindale made a perfunctory examination and told Eli there was nothing
to worry about.” MacKinlay Kantor, “The Grave Grass Quivers”
permeated “The play is permeated with scriptural imagery, notably a Last Supper.” Robert
Brustein, New Republic, 6/7/99
pernicious “This chapter exposes a pernicious obstacle to students and teachers engaging in
serious work together.” Robert L. Fried, The Passionate Teacher
perpetrated “Thanks to Mr. DeLay, we learn that violence perpetrated by gun owners is
really the product of larger forces.” Editorial, “Mr. DeLay’s Power Play,” New York Times,
6/20/99
perpetuate “The laws would often do no more than perpetuate a legislator ’s acts of
injustice.” Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract
persevered “The Knicks persevered as first Patrick Ewing and then Johnson went down with
injuries.” George Vecsey, “Sports of the Times,” New York Times, 6/22/99
perspicacious “Nobody deserves the Lifetime Achievement Award more than Army Archerd,
who is not only perspicacious, but a gentleman as well.” Liz Smith, Newsday, 6/2/99
pertinent “What seems pertinent is to observe that jazz gravitated toward a particular kind of
environment in which its existence was probable.” Arnold Sungaard, Jazz, Hot and Cold
peruse “Stopping to peruse her mail, Raven didn’t notice that the front door was ajar.”
Dolores Kent, Instant Gratification
perverse “There is something contemptible in the prospect of a number of petty states with
the appearance only of union, jarring, jealous, and perverse.” Alexander Hamilton, speech,
1782
pesky “Oranges down there is like a young man’s whiskers; you enjoy them at first, but they
get to be a pesky nuisance.” Ring W. Lardner, “The Golden Honeymoon”
phenomenon “This phenomenon is characterized by a temporary reversal of the normal
atmospheric conditions, in which the air near the earth is warmer than the air higher up.”
Berton Roueché, “The Fog”
phlegmatic “Duncan had a phlegmatic fourth quarter, dooming the Spurs’ opportunity to
humble the New York Knicks.” TV announcer, NBA Finals, 6/22/99
phobia “My phobia was such that the slightest touch produced twinges of pain.” Guy De
Maupassant, “Looking Back”
pinnacle “Their little barber-shop quartet reached the pinnacle of their career with a firstplace finish on Major Bowes’ ‘Amateur Hour.’ ” David and Marge Buchanan, “No Business
Like You Know What”
pique “In a fit of pique he raised his pistol to take aim at me but Masha threw herself at his
feet.” Aleksandr Pushkin, “The Shot”
pittance “To be paid a mere pittance and yet to be suspected of theft; never in her life had she
been subjected to such an outrage.” Anton Chekhov, “An Upheaval”
placards “Yet a mile away at the ultra-orthodox Mea Shearim neighborhood, wall placards
now warn residents not to have Internet-linked computers in their homes.” Thomas Friedman,
“All in the Family,” New York Times, 6/22/99
plaintiff “When the attorney for the palsied plaintiff finished, there wasn’t a dry eye in the
courtroom.” Rose Axelsohn, “The Defense Rests” [adapted]
platitudes “The topic was, ‘What Is Life?’ and the students labored at it busily with their
platitudes.” Philip Roth, American Pastoral
plethora “SUFFERERS CONFRONT A PLETHORA OF POLLEN” Headline, New York Times,
6/5/99
plight “I had the sense that his loneliness was not merely the result of his personal plight.”
Edith Wharton, Ethan Frome
poignant “Keen, poignant agonies seemed to shoot from his neck downward through every
fiber of his body and limbs.” Ambrose Bierce, “An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge”
pondered “As I made my way back, I pondered the significance of what I’d seen.” Nicholas
Kristof, “1492: The Prequel”
potent “Those huge differences in income found in our society must have potent causes.”
Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel
potentates “The racing season at Saratoga invited all manner of society—from potentates to
paupers.” Lanny Richards, “They’re Off!”
potential “We realized that this system had worked because the potential targets were so
many that the Germans could not get a definite idea of where we would strike.” Ewen
Montagu, The Man Who Never Was
potpourri “A potpourri of fresh fruits and cool cottage cheese make for a delicious lunch
treat when the temperatures rise into the high 90s.” Martha Stewart, CBS News, 5/23/98
pragmatic “His conservative approach to investing has made millions of dollars for those
who share Warren Buffet’s pragmatic philosophy.” “Master of Berkshire-Hathaway,” Profile
of Warren Buffet, New York Times
precedent “One can imagine a time when the voters ignore precedent and elect a woman to
the office of President of the United States.” Barbara Walker, The Women’s Encyclopedia
precipitate “The weight of a finger might precipitate the tragedy, hurl him at once into the
dim, gray unknown.” Stephen Crane, “An Episode of War”
precluded “I would be avenged; this was a point definitely settled—but the very definitiveness
with which it was resolved precluded the idea of risk.” Edgar Allan Poe, “The Cask of
Amontillado”
precocious “Pediatricians interviewed this week were somewhat divided on the value of TV
viewing by precocious children.” Lawrie Miflin, “Tough Rules for TV,” New York Times,
8/4/99
prelude “Bounderby’s prelude to his main point was very well received by Mrs. Sparsit who
said, ‘Very sagacious indeed, sir.’” Charles Dickens, Hard Times
premise “That train of reasoning has all the various parts and terms—its major premise and
its conclusion.” T. H. Huxley, “We Are All Scientists”
premonition “There seemed to be a gentle stir arising over everything—a very premonition
of rest and hush and night.” Mary Wilkens Freeman, “The New England Nun”
prerogative “Governor Pataki exercised his prerogative as titular head of the party to endorse
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.” Editorial, “Truce Among New York Republicans,” New York
Times, 8/7/99
prestigious “He had finally reached his present prestigious position of wealth and security,
and he felt he was entitled to sit back and enjoy his happiness.” Ronald Byron, “Happy Days
for Harrison Gumedi”
pretext “Our mother had been expressly enjoined by her husband to give Madame
Cornouiller some plausible pretext for refusing.” Anatole France, “Putois”
prevalent “On the all-news channels the most prevalent images were from a helicopter
pursuing the police chase.” New York Post, 7/30/99
prevarication “They must honestly swear to this oath without prevarication or reservation.”
Supreme Court Justice Byron White, speech, 12/1/64
privations “It aroused a strong response in our hearts when he told about their sufferings and
privations.” Selma Lagerlöf, Harvest
procrastinated “Mr. Brooksmith procrastinated for several days before accepting my offer.”
Henry James, “Brooksmith”
prodigious “He knew from the moment he left the ground that it was a prodigious jump.”
Joseph N. Bell, “The Olympics Biggest Winner”
prodigy “I grant you Clive—Clive was a prodigy, a genius and met the fate of geniuses.”
Stephen Vincent Benet, “The Curfew Tolls”
proffer “Orin came to proffer his condolences when, wonder of wonder, he fell in love with
the grieving widow.” Terence Cavanaugh, “An Ill Wind”
profligate “Her innocent appearance had a peculiar attraction for a vicious profligate, who
had hitherto admired only the coarser types of feminine beauty.” Fyodor Dostoyevsky, The
Brothers Käramazov
profound “So why no profound works on the need for $660 million in tax credits for
companies that burn chicken droppings?” Editorial, “Tax-Cut Favors,” New York Times,
8/7/99
profuse “He offered profuse apologies for his show of exasperation, and he volunteered to
read to her, something in French.” Aldous Huxley, “The Giaconda Smile”
progeny “First, let me tell you whom you have condemn’d: Not me begotten of a shepherd
swain, But issued from the progeny of kings.” William Shakespeare, Henry IV
prognostication “Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication I cannot scratch my
ear.” William Shakespeare, Antony and Cleopatra
prohibition “The U.S. public is slowly coming around to accepting the idea that a prohibition
against the easy access to hand guns is inevitable.” Roger Rosenblatt, “Get Rid of the Damned
Things,” TIME, 8/9/99
prolific “Isaac Asimov was a truly prolific writer, seemingly able to complete a book every
two weeks.” Art Nichols, Selling Your Manuscript
promulgated “The rules and regulations are promulgated for the guidance of administrative
employees, bureau heads, and supervisors.” “Rules and Regulations for Administrative
Employees,” NYC Board of Education
propagate “The Republican leadership planned to propagate their philosophy for a huge tax
cut during the summer recess.” Wolf Blitzer, CNN Nightly News, 7/14/99
propensity “You had a propensity for telling simple and professional tales before the war.”
Joseph Conrad, “The Tale”
propinquity “It occurred to him that Varick might be talking at random to relieve the strain of
their propinquity.” Edith Wharton, The Desert of Man
propitious “Sometime later, I will find a propitious ground and bury you there in the same
grave.” Shen Chunlieh, “In Memory of a Child,” 1619
propriety “There is a propriety and necessity of preventing interference with the course of
justice.” Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, decision, 10/28
proximity “Stryker had built a small cannery in close proximity to the house where the turtles
were raised in shallow tanks.” Edmund Wilson, “The Man Who Shot Snapping Turtles”
prudent “Those who thought the prudent thing to do at the end of 1999 was to stay away from
flying resulted in the slowest day of the year for every airline.” TIME, 1/12/00
pugnacious “Two pugnacious guard dogs in the railyard eliminated the nightly vandalism in
a hurry.” Lewis Tumulty, “Civic Pride”
puissant “The combination of the drugs has become a puissant cocktail in the fight against
AIDS.” Medical report, CBS News, 9/20/98
pungent “The pungent aroma of the cream puffs told Sadie that the man from Goobers had
arrived.” Katherine Mansfield, “The Garden Party”
puny “I have said that I am a weak and puny man, and you will have proof of that directly.”
Max Beerbohm, “A. V. Laidler”
qualms “The manager had qualms about allowing him to continue playing with an injured
hand.” Sports Illustrated, 6/16/98
quandary “New Year ’s Eve presented a quandary for people in China, a country where the
observance of non-political Western celebrations is a relatively recent phenomenon.”
Elizabeth Rosenthal, “Party? What Party?,” New York Times, 1/1/00
quarry “The state troopers had tracked their quarry to the thickly wooded area near the crime
scene.” Newsday, 4/10/98
quell “He also did not quell the speculation surrounding Van Gundy’s status as coach.” Mike
Wise, New York Times, 5/25/99
quip “The audience screamed and applauded hysterically at every musical number, every
quip, every little movement on the stage.” Liz Smith, Newsday, 6/2/99
rabid “Politicians avoid the appearance of being rabid on issues that seem to be evenly
viewed by the voters.” Arthur Willner, “Taking Sides”
raconteur “As a popular raconteur, George Jessel was prized as a speaker at award
ceremonies.” The Hollywood Reporter, 7/18/96
railed “He cursed and railed, and finally declared he was going to trail the raiders.” Zane
Grey, Raiders of the Purple Sage
raiment “No matter what her raiment, Marilyn Monroe looked absolutely fabulous on the
screen.” Billy Wilder quoted by Earl Wilson, Chicago Tribune, 2/28/76
rampant “What’s more curious about the determination to end social promotions is that the
practice is far from rampant.” Romesh Ratnesar, “Held Back,” TIME, 6/14/99
rash “Thou art as rash as fire to say That she was false.” William Shakespeare, Othello
rationalize “It is the task of the scientist to rationalize the remains of extinct civilizations to
discover their histories.” Brian Fagan, Time Detective
raucous “The 1968 Democratic nominating convention in Chicago was the scene of raucous
confrontations.” I. F. Stone, Weekly Reader
razed “In the gorge, continually razed by the clawing wind, he would probably find his other
dog.” Francisco Coloane, “Cururo . . . Sheep Dog”
realm “In all the churches of the realm the Blessed Sacrament is exposed night and day, and
tall candles are burning for the recovery of the royal child.” Alphonse Daudet, “The Death of
the Dauphin”
rebuke “The defeat of the charter revision was viewed as a rebuke of his policies.” Editorial,
New York Times, 11/7/99
recanted “The government’s key witness in the case recanted her testimony, claiming she had
been intimidated by prosecutors.” Rob Polner, “Set Back for Prosecutors,” New York Post,
6/23/99
recoil “It is a gesture of response to my remarks, and it always makes me recoil with a laugh.”
Thomas Mann, “A Man and His Dog”
recondite “If it seems too recondite for anyone but dwellers in the groves of Academe, one
must consider rhyming slang which originated in the underworld.” Bergen Evans, “Now
Everyone Is Hip About Slang”
redolent “The scene—a decrepit classroom, redolent of moldy books, and the pencil
shavings of generations of boys being ground into the hardwood floor.” Jon Robin Baitz, The
Film Society
redress “There has been much discussion about the fairest way to redress centuries of
discrimination.” “A Time to Begin,” Readers Digest, 5/92
refute “The tobacco industry has stopped trying to refute the charge that smoking is both
dangerous and addictive.” U.S. News and World Report, 2/3/98
relegated “They were to be relegated to the outer circle of my life.” Van Wyck Brooks, Helen
Keller
remiss “If the mayor thought that one of his commissioners had been remiss in following
instructions, he would fly into a rage and throw his glasses at him.” David Rockefeller on
Mayor LaGuardia, New York Times, 10/10/99
remote “The pull of the remote stars is so slight as to be obliterated in the vaster moments by
which the ocean yields to the moon and sun.” Rachel Carson, The Sea Around Us
remuneration “Please mail your resume along with your expected remuneration to our
Director of Personnel.” Want ad, New York Times, 7/7/99
repented “At his court martial, the officer admitted to the charges and repented.” “General
Demoted,” Washington Post, 9/2/99
repertoire “He led a secret life as a forger of paintings, with the most famous as part of his
repertoire.” Peter Landesman, New York Times, 7/18/99
replenish “We’ll dip down into our farm system to replenish our stock of left-handed
pitchers.” Bobby Valentine, ABC-TV Sports Interview
replete “When a composition is so replete with errors, I call attention to only a few, the most
important ones.” Fran Weinberg, English teacher, NYC High Schools
repose “Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest Come to thy heart as that within my
breast.” William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet
reprehensible “She thought that the prisoners, no matter how morally reprehensible their
crimes, still should have the benefit of pretrial representation.” Jimmy Breslin’s syndicated
column, Newsday, 6/15/99
repressed “General McClellan repressed his feelings about President Lincoln but he
expressed his private anger in letters to his wife.” David Herbert Donald, Lincoln
reprimand “The difficulty lay in the fact the man had previously received a reprimand from
his employer regarding his easy-going ways with the men under him in his department.”
James Thurber, “Let Your Mind Alone”
reproached “When reminded that he knew little history, Henry Ford reproached his critics by
reminding them that history would know him.” Quoted in The Will Rogers Book, Paula Love,
editor, 1961
repudiate “If upheld, the decision would repudiate one of the Administration’s environmental
achievements.” Editorial, New York Times, 5/19/99
repugnant “The behavior of the few rioters at the rock concert was repugnant to the huge,
peaceful crowd.” “Woodstock Revisited,” TIME, 6/7/99
repulse “The cannons were set up to repulse a possible invasion but none was ever attempted.”
Col. F. X. Prescott, “History as Our Teacher”
reputed “The language of Iceland has changed so little that modern Icelanders are reputed to
be able to read sagas written thousands of years ago.” Bill Bryson, Mother Tongue
requisite “Secrecy is more requisite than ever during the sensitive negotiations over the
release of our prisoners.” I. F. Stone, Weekly Reader
resourceful “The crew of the $20 million independent film had to be very resourceful to hold
down costs.” Beth L. Kiel, “Allen in Hollywood,” New York, 6/21/99
respite “The plan enabled the oiler and the correspondent to set respite together.” Stephen
Crane, “The Open Boat”
restrictive “Mr. el Hage said that the law was too restrictive, claiming that he had nothing to
do with violent acts.” Benjamin Weiser, “Terrorism Suspect,” New York Times, 6/23/99
reticent “He was as inquisitive about the country as he was reticent about his business there.”
Frances Gilchrist Woods, “Turkey Red”
retort “There is no need to retort to an employee who has written a critique of your original
warning letter.” NYC Board of Education’s Food Service Division, Guide for Managers
retrospect “I shivered in retrospect when I thought of that afternoon meeting in the freezing
hall.” Anna L. Strong, The Chinese Conquer China
reverberated “When that putt plunked into the hole yesterday, the 40,000 people exploded in a
roar that reverberated through more than a century of U.S. Open history.” Dave Anderson,
“Longest Final Putt,” New York Times, 6/21/99
revere “Paul McCartney and other celebrities who yet revere the name of rock-and-roll great
Buddy Holly will host a tribute to him at the Roseland Ballroom.” Letta Taylor, “Tribute to
Buddy,” Newsday, 9/3/99
reverts “She dreamily reverts to the hour when old age will throw down his frosts upon her
head.” Walt Whitman, “Dreams”
reviled “Former Haitian President Aristede was reviled by orphanage graduates who claimed
that he had lied to them about the promise of jobs.” Associated Press story, “Haiti Gunmen
Confront Police,” New York Times, 6/25/99
rhetoric “Nothing good can come out of the rhetoric of hatred that will be heard at the rally.”
New York Congressman Charles Rangel, ABC TV News, 9/2/99
rife “Cyberspace is rife with sweatshops but very few people realize it.” Karl Taro Greenfield,
“Living the Late Shift,” TIME, 6/28/99
rift “The 1993 tear gas assault on the Branch Dividian cult has created a rift between the FBI
and the Attorney General’s office.” Associated Press report, “FBI Video Released,” Newsday,
9/3/99
romp “She was expected to win the governor’s race in a romp.” Wolf Blitzer, CNN News,
2/2/98
roster “The roster of stars for our gala celebration includes Cher, Meatloaf, and Lyle Lovett.”
Las Vegas hotel ad
rudimentary “Some of them were singing, some talking, some engaged in gardening, haymaking, or other rudimentary industries.” “The Other Side of the Hedge,” E. M. Forster
rue “When they make a mistake they will rue it.” Randi Feigenbaum, “Realtors’ Deal Irks
Lawyers,” Newsday, 9/3/99
ruminated “Lou Gehrig, the great N.Y. Yankee star, ruminated on his career as he left because
of an incurable illness: ‘I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the earth.’ ” Speech,
7/4/39
rustic “This week a rustic setting in the Berkshire Hills was a gathering place for a group that
is dedicated to preserving the Yiddish language.” Tina Rosenberg, “Living an American Life
in Yiddish,” New York Times, 9/3/99
saga “The saga of the Kennedy family has enthralled and saddened us.” Barbara Walters,
quoted in New York Times, 7/10/99
sage “I am not a visionary, nor am I a sage—I claim to be a practical idealist.” Mohandas
Gandhi quoted by John Gunther, Procession, 1965
salient “The salient feature of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 is that it prohibits
discrimination against the disabled.” Robert McFadden, “Court Ruling on Disabled Teacher Is
Annulled,” New York Times, 6/25/99
sally “The next morning we decided to sally forth to try to find a site for our new home.”
Stephen Leacock, “How My Wife and I Built Our Home for $4.90”
salubrious “For my later years there remains the salubrious effects of work: stimulation and
satisfaction.” Kathe Kollwitz, Diaries and Letters, 1955
salvation “Maybe it is connected with some terrible sin, with the loss of eternal salvation,
with some bargain with the devil.” Aleksandr Pushkin, “The Queen of Spades”
sanctimonious “There has never been a shortage of sanctimonious arguments for starting a
war.” Peter Finley Dunne, Mr. Dooley Remembers
sanction “He received his father’s sanction and authority.” George Meredith, Diana of the
Crossways
sanctuary “The identity of Rinehart may be a temporary sanctuary for the narrator, but it is
another identity he must reject if he is to find himself as a person.” Anthony Abbott, Invisible
Man
sanguine “I’m not sanguine about the Knicks’ chances to upset the San Antonio Spurs.”
Telephone caller to WFAN Sports Radio Program, 6/8/99
satiety “One of the soldiers was given leave to be drunk six weeks, in hopes of curing him by
satiety.” William Cowper, Selected Letters
saturate “Vanilla sweetens the air, ginger spices it; melting nose-tingling odors saturate the
kitchen.” Truman Capote, “A Christmas Memory”
schism “The schism between the manager and his best pitcher spilled over from the locker
room onto the field.” Bob Klapisch, The Worst Team That Money Could Buy
scion “Al Gore is the Good Son, the early achieving scion from Harvard and Tennessee who
always thought he would be President.” Maureen Dowd, “Freudian Face-Off,” New York
Times, 6/15/99
scoffed “No one was injured except the woman who had scoffed at the belief.” Leonard
Fineberg, “Fire Walking in Ceylon”
scrutinized “The jockey waited with his back to the wall and scrutinized the room with
pinched, creepy eyes.” Carson McCullers, “The Jockey”
scurrilous “They were infuriated by the scurrilous articles about them that started to crop up
in the tabloids.” Charles Blauvelt, Edward and Wally
scurry “Some small night-bird, flitting noiselessly near the ground on its soft wings, almost
flapped against me, only to scurry away in alarm.” Ivan Turgenev, “Bezhin Meadows”
sedate “Few public places maintain a sedate atmosphere equal to the majestic chambers of the
Supreme Court.” Milton Konvitz, editor, Bill of Rights Reader
sedentary “Seeger had seen him relapsing gradually into the small-town hardware merchant
he had been before the war, sedentary and a little shy.” Irwin Shaw, “Act of Faith”
senile “Being on golf’s Senior Tour doesn’t mean that we’re senile.” Leon Jaroff, “Those
Rich Old Pros,” TIME, 9/27/99
serenity “At the top, they planted the crucifix and gathered round, moved by the serenity.”
Sontag Orme, “Solemnity and Flash in the Land of Jesus,” New York Times, 1/1/00
servile “Uriah Heep, so physically repulsive and hypocritically servile, fascinated David at
first but later revolted him.” Holly Hughes, Barron’s Book Notes, David Copperfield by
Charles Dickens
shibboleths Dialects are sometimes used as shibboleths to signal the ethnic or social status of
the speaker.” Bill Bryson, Mother Tongue
sinecure “Matthew Arnold’s job was a sinecure, allowing him plenty of time to travel and
write lyrics.” Nicholas Jenkins, “A Gift Improvised,” New York Times, 6/20/99
singular “The fate that rules in matters of love is often singular, and its ways are inscrutable,
as this story will show.” Meyer Goldschmidt, “Henrik and Rosalie”
sinister “The man had a cordially sinister air.” Hernando Tellez, “Ashes for the Wind”
site “The site of the bison herd’s destruction was a tall cliff over which they were driven.”
Brian Fagan, Time Detectives
skirmish “They never meet but there’s a skirmish of wit between them.” William Shakespeare,
Much Ado About Nothing
slovenly “The twenty-six year old’s slovenly appearance belied the fact that he was one of the
Silicon Valley’s brightest stars.” Reuben Cowan, “Today Dot-Com”
sojourn “He returned from a long sojourn in Europe.” Alan McCulloch, Encyclopedia of
Australian Art
solace “He read in a Bible that he had neglected for years, but he could gain little solace from
it.” Theodore Dreiser, “The Lost Phoebe”
solicited “The police chief said that Commissioner Safir had not yet solicited his opinion on
the question.” “Police Chief Says Officers Deserve Raise,” New York Times, 6/15/99
somber “There was a somber and moving tribute for his last game at Yankee Stadium.” John
Updike, New Yorker, 10/22/94
sophistry “No amount of sophistry could disguise the obvious fact that the legislation was
biased against one particular office holder.” New York Times, 9/2/99
sordid “The workmen used revolting language; it was disgusting and sordid.” Katherine
Mansfield, “The Garden Party”
spate “There has been a spate of tell-all memoirs, destroying the organization’s special
status.” Jewish Monthly, 9/99
spew “It was obvious as the miles of electronic tape began to spew out the new patterns of
American life that the census was to be of historic dimension.” Theodore H. White, The
Making of the President
spontaneous “Professor Einstein burst out in spontaneous candidness.” Thomas Lee Bucky,
“Einstein: An Intimate Memoir”
sporadic “TROOPS ENCOUNTER SPORADIC VIOLENCE” Headline, Newsday, 6/14/99
spurious “The only known picture, albeit a spurious one, had been printed some years
earlier.” James Monaghan, Diplomat in Carpet Slippers
squeamish “My brother, who voted for Mr. Mbeki and who has faith in his leadership, is not
squeamish.” Mark Mathabane, “South Africa’s Lost Generation”
stagnant “The place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and
foul.” T. E. Lawrence, The Desert of the Stars
staunch “Known as a staunch supporter of the Republican agenda, the young politician
astounded us all by his defection.” Monte Halperin, “Party Turncoat?”
steeped “Edward Francis had steeped himself in the internal mystery of the guinea pig.” Paul
De Kruif, Hunger Fighters
stentorian “He proclaimed the fact in stentorian tones that were easily heard throughout the
auditorium.” A. A. Berle, The 20th Century Capitalist Revolution
stereotypes “Treating the most respected leader in the land that way confirms the worst
stereotypes and that really hurts us.” Alessandra Stanley, “Asking a Favor of the Pope,” New
York Times, 6/12/99
stigmatized “People who so much as whisper during a performance are stigmatized as
barbarians.” Joseph Wechsberg, The Best Things in Life
stipulated “I shall come out from here five minutes before the stipulated term, and thus shall
violate the agreement.” Anton Chekhov, “The Bet”
strident “No matter how strident or insulting he became, he was not interrupted by the
police.” New York Daily News, 9/5/99
strife “Either there is a civil strife, Or else the world, too saucy with the gods, Incenses them
to send destruction.” William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar
stunted “Their physical and mental development became stunted during childhood.” Roger
Pineles, Shame of the Cities
stupor “If your child watches late night television and comes home from school in a stupor,
she’s not getting enough sleep.” “Getting Enough Sleep,” Working Mother, 5/98
stymied “The family has been stymied in its attempt to remove a dead relative from the juror
rolls.” Associated Press story, “Jury Duty Summonses Don’t Stop Despite Death,” New York
Times, 6/25/99
subjugated “The country had been bitterly divided, so ruthless in its determination to keep the
black majority subjugated.” Sheryl McCarthy, “Mandela Was South Africa’s Perfect Choice,”
Newsday, 6/17/99
subservient “From the earliest times, including the Bible, women have been counseled to be
subservient to men.” Barbara G. Walker, The Women’s Encyclopedia
substantiate “The Queens District Attorney said that there were not enough facts to
substantiate the charges against the tour operator so no prosecution would take place.”
Queens Courier, 1/18/00
subterfuge “He was a free-will agent and he chose to do careful work, and if he failed, he
took the responsibility without subterfuge.” Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings, “A Mother in
Mannville”
subterranean “Another celebrity expected during the three games at Madison Square Garden
is Ed Norton—the actor, not the subterranean sanitation professional.” Richard Sandomir,
“N.B.A. Finals,” New York Times, 6/21/99
succinct “In clear and succinct tones, our division head proceeded to tear me to shreds in
front of the entire staff.” Elleyn Falk, “They Promised Me a Rose Garden”
succulent “Use this coupon to get $1 off on a succulent holiday turkey.” Advertisement,
Waldbaum’s Supermarket, 11/99
succumbed “This young gentleman was of an excellent family but had been reduced to such
poverty that the energy of his character succumbed beneath it.” Edgar Allan Poe, “The
Murders in the Rue Morgue”
sullen “My decision to leave put her into a sullen silence, broken only by a mumble under her
breath.” Alan Lelchuk, “American Mischief”
sultry “The sun would shine up there in the lengthening spring day and pleasant breezes blow
in sultry summer.” Maurice Walsh, The Quiet Man
sumptuous “In the summer the table was set, and the sumptuous meals—well, it makes me cry
to think of them.” Mark Twain, Autobiography
superficial “His teachings had only a superficial relationship to the orthodox religion he
advocated.” Carl Dreyer, “The Roots of Anti-Semitism”
superfluous “He drove through the beautiful countryside in silence; conversation would have
been superfluous.” Travel and Leisure, 10/94
supine “The clergy as a whole were therefore obedient and supine.” G. M. Trevelyan, Carlyle
supplication “The last supplication I make of you is that you will believe this of me.” Charles
Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities
surfeit “A surfeit of the sweetest things The deepest loathing to the stomach brings.” William
Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night’s Dream
surge “In one wild surge they stormed into a police station, where the bewildered officers
tried to maintain order.” James Michener, “The Bridge at Andau”
surmised “The commanding officer surmised that the other ship in the cove was a coaster.”
Joseph Conrad, Tales of Hearsay
surreptitiously “He was surreptitiously negotiating to have 70 percent of the payments turned
over to himself.” David C. Johnson, “Tax Evasion Scheme,” New York Times, 1/1/00
susceptible “Wrestling matches are susceptible to being heavily scripted, as ardent fans
know.” Edward Wyatt, “Pinning Down a Share Value,” New York Times, 8/4/99
symptomatic “The widespread dislocation and downsizing in hospitals is symptomatic of
relentless cost pressures.” Carol Eisenberg, “Nurses Contend With System’s Ills,” Newsday,
6/22/99
taboo “The modern motion pictures have shown so much that once was considered taboo.”
Harold H. Owen, Jr., The Motion Picture
tacit “There is a tacit agreement in a civil conversation that each avoid making of it a
monologue.” Rebecca West, “There Is No Conversation”
tainted “The defense argued that poor police procedures had tainted the evidence.” Newsday,
6/19/98
tangible “I hated it, not because of our one overcrowded closet, but because of intrusions and
discomforts of a far less tangible nature.” Mary Ellen Chase, “A Room of My Own”
tantalized “We were tantalized by a glimpse of a brown bear and her cubs in the wood.”
Travel and Leisure, 10/97
tantamount “Opponents of the proposed agreement claim it is tantamount to a surrender of
holy land.” USA. Today, 1/13/00
taut “His face grew taut as he was questioned about his use of illegal drugs in his youth.”
New York Post, 8/19/99
technology “Mr. Greenspan noted that ‘history is strewn’ with miscalculations about
technology developments.” Richard Stevenson, “Fed Chief on New-Age Economy,” New York
Times, 6/15/99
temerity “In the first month of his service in the House, the young Congressman had the
temerity to challenge his party’s Speaker; it was a mistake.” Blanche Kassell, Up on the Hill
tenable “He took the tenable position that lawyers should never cross examine a witness
without knowing the answer before asking the question.” Harper Lee, To Kill a Mockingbird
tenacious “Their talent and tenacious actions on the court will at last reward them.” Darcy
Frey, The Last Shot
termagant “This book deals with the matrimonial adventures of an extremely rich and
bullying termagant.” Saturday Review, 11/99
terminate “A continuation of such chronic lateness may lead us to terminate your
employment.” Regulations of the NYC Board of Education’s Office of School Food &
Nutrition Services
terse “The mayor sent a terse letter to the school’s chancellor over his cancellation of a
meeting.” New York Times, 8/5/99
therapy “He will have to undergo long-term therapy before considering playing baseball
again.” The Washington Post, 7/9/99
throng “When the throng had mostly streamed into the porch, the sexton began to toll the
bell.” Nathaniel Hawthorne, “The Minister ’s Black Veil”
thwarted “The man who made up the name for flies must have been thwarted in a life-long
desire to have children, and at last found that outlet for his suppressed baby-talk.” Robert
Benchley, “The Lure of the Road”
timorous “He was a timorous incompetent who was lucky to have good men under him.” W.
A. Swanberg, Citizen Hearst
tinged “The sermon was tinged, rather more darkly than usual, with the gentle gloom of Mr.
Hooper ’s temperament.” Nathaniel Hawthorne, “The Minister ’s Black Veil”
tolerated “They despise anyone who hasn’t had the luck to be born Masai, but for one reason
and another, they tolerated me.” Robert W. Krepps, “Pride of Seven”
tortuous “The tortuous descent down the mountain resulted in one additional fatality, this
time a sure-footed Sherpa guide.” Winston Adair, “Everest Takes Its Toll”
tradition “The town had a century-old tradition—an eight-hour canoe race.” Brenda Flock,
“The Race”
tranquil “Over this house, most tranquil and complete, Where no storm ever beat, She was
sole mistress.” Phyllis McGinley, “The Doll House”
transient “City championships and national tournaments, however thrilling, are transient
moments.” Darcy Frey, The Last Shot
tremulous “‘Will Pa get hurt?’ asked Jane in a tremulous voice.” Jessamyn West, “Yes, We’ll
Gather at the River”
trenchant “Mr. Salinger ’s views on celebrity are often funny and trenchant.” Clyde
Haberman, “A Recluse Meets His Match,” New York Times, 6/18/99
trend “We should make every effort to reverse the trend in popular music towards violent
lyrics.” Portland Oregonian, 8/12/99
trivial “In the study of past civilizations, nothing is considered as a trivial discovery.” Brian
Fagan, Time Detectives
truncated “It will be much harder if their state (Palestine) is so truncated, so cut up, that it is
not viable.” Anthony Lewis, “The Irrelevance of a Palestinian State,” New York Times, 6/20/99
turbulent “Up to the turbulent surface came a peculiar-looking craft, risen from the calm but
dangerous depth of the ocean.” Lt. Don Walsh, “Our Seven-Mile Dive to the Bottom”
turpitude “The government must be held responsible for these acts of moral turpitude
resulting in so many civilian casualties.” TIME, 8/25/98
tussle “It often doesn’t pay to tussle with your child to take music lessons.” Working Mother,
5/96
tyro “The computer training center will soon turn a tyro into a successful user.” Senior News,
9/99
ubiquitous “Che Guevera has become ubiquitous; his figure stares out at us from coffee
mugs and posters, pops up in rock songs and operas.” Ariel Dorfman, “Che,” TIME, 6/14/99
ultimate “The ultimate possibility for hero and chorus alike is stated in Father Mapple’s
sermon, and it is to become a saint.” W. H. Auden, “The Christian Tragic Hero”
umbrage “I do not take umbrage when I’m looked over, I do when I’m overlooked.” Mae
West, The Wit and Wisdom of Mae West, Joseph Weintraub, Editor
unabated “The summer list of auto fatalities continues unabated as three more Southampton
teens are killed in a Sunday crash.” W. Mariano, “A Final Farewell,” Newsday, 6/25/99
unconscionable “Viewers of TV’s coverage of disasters find it unconscionable for mourning
family members to be shown and interviewed so close up we can see the tears.” John
Stephens, New York, 4/16/98
unctuous “Today’s car salesmen are a far cry from the high-pressured and unctuous ones of
the past.” Car and Travel, 9/99
underwrite “We are pleased to feature those local businesses who help to underwrite our
programs.” Patterns, monthly magazine of WILL, Champaign, Illinois
universal “With the approach of the new millennium we see an almost universal fear of major
disruptions.” TIME, 9/19/99
unkempt “Budget cuts have resulted in overcrowded and unkempt camping sites in our
parks.” Freeman Tilden, The National Parks
unmitigated “The crossword puzzle is the unmitigated sedentary hobby of Americans.” Bill
Bryson, Mother Tongue
unsavory “Punishing students by assigning them more work, has made education unsavory
and unappealing to the average student.” H. C. McKown, “The Three R’s Today”
unwieldy “Today’s light weight, compact cameras are a far cry from the unwieldy ones used
by early photographers.” Popular Photography, 9/96
urbane “Their prose is less ornate, their urbane satire more muted.” Book review, New York
Times
usurp “There is a constant struggle as one branch of government attempts to usurp some of
the powers of the other.” Milton Konvitz, editor, Bill of Rights Reader
utopia “I was held spellbound by the middle-class utopia, without a blot, without a tear.”
William James, “What Makes Life Significant”
vacillated “In planning for the book I vacillated between a selective, but deeper approach or a
general, more limited approach.” Milton Konvitz, editor, Bill of Rights Reader
valor “Thrice have the Mexicans before us fled, Their armies broken, their prince in triumph
led; Both to thy valor, brave young man, we owe.” Sir Robert Howard & John Dryden, The
Indian Queen
vapid “The new James Bond movie lacks the excitement of the many before and is a vapid
copy.” Newsday, 10/25/98
vehemently “The President spoke vehemently against any large tax cut.” New York Times,
9/16/99
veneer “Since then, she has frequently tried to crack the veneer of role, surface, and pose.”
Mark Stevens, “Spice Girls,” New York, 6/21/99
venerable “Despite their huge popularity the most venerable papers refused to accept
crossword puzzles as more than a passing fad.” Bill Bryson, Mother Tongue
venial “The coach tried to overlook the venial errors of his players and concentrated on the
serious ones.” Sports Illustrated, 5/12/99
venom “The point envenom’d too! Then, venom, do thy work.” William Shakespeare, Hamlet
vertigo “Iron workers on beams, hundreds of feet above Broadway, were immune to periods
of vertigo.” Architectural Digest, 1/93
vestige “They kept at the rescue efforts as long as there was a vestige of hope for the
earthquake victims.” TIME, 8/30/99
vexatious “This vexatious law suit dragged on interminably, becoming a legend in the
process.” Charles Dickens, Bleak House
viable “The organism remains viable in the soil for years.” Rachel Carson, Silent Spring
vicissitudes “Her husband was not only faithful but patient in the face of remarkable
vicissitudes.” Eliza Jane Berman, Noble Minds
vigil “The U.N. peacekeeping troops are keeping a vigil over the disputed area.” New York
Times, 9/21/99
vigilant “I deny not but that it is of great concernment in the church and commonwealth to
have a vigilant eye how looks demean themselves.” John Milton, “Aereopagitica”
vilified “One who belongs to the most vilified minority in history is not likely to be unaware
of the freedoms guaranteed by our constitutions.” Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter,
decision, October 1943
vindicated “His family was certain that his actions would be vindicated when all of the facts
became available.” “Pilot Blamed in Crash,” New York Post, 11/26/99
virile “The danger to our virile economy from weaknesses in the Far East should not be
overlooked.” Wall Street Journal, 5/16/98
virtuosity “Employing his virtuosity as an orchestrator of suspense, the author puts Lector in
Florence, Italy, speaking impeccable Italian.” Paul Grey, “Dessert, Anyone?,” TIME, 6/21/99
virulently “Another part of my hope was for communities of people of colour that, for the
most part, have been virulently homophobic.” Mark Haslam, “When Bigotry Kills,” Globe
and Mail, Toronto, 3/5/99
vitiate “This act is an attempt to vitiate the separation of powers upon which our democracy
is founded.” Justice Earl Warren, Bill of Rights Reader, 1957
vitriolic “The speaker’s vitriolic comments about ethnic and religious groups brought
condemnation from the mayor.” New York Daily News, 9/5/98
vituperation “To justify his action he used vituperation, calling his enemies ‘detestable
pests.’” Barbara G. Walker, The Women’s Encyclopedia
vivacious “The performance of this vivacious leading lady made the play a delight.” New York
Post, 10/15/98
vogue “Examining the private lives of our political leaders is in vogue this election period.”
New York, 9/4/99
volition “To prove her innocence, she took a lie detector test of her own volition.” New York
Times, 9/21/99
voluble “He came to hate Ray Gribble and his voluble companions of the submerged tenth of
the class.” Sinclair Lewis, “Young Man Axelbrod”
voluminous “The testimony in the case relating to the President’s actions has become
voluminous.” Washington Post, 5/15/99
voracious “We spent a good number of our waking hours feeding voracious stoves.” Jean
Stafford, “New England Winter”
vulnerable “Any vulnerable area in an otherwise strong person or structure is known as an
Achilles heel.” Barbara G. Walker, The Women’s Encyclopedia
wan “Why so pale and wan, fond lover? Prithee, why so pale?” John Suckling,
“Encouragement to a Lover”
wane “Japan, once an economic power, has seen its influence wane.” New York Times, 8/1/99
wary “These figures were wary in their movements and perfectly silent afoot.” Joseph
Conrad, Lord Jim
wheedle “The first step of a politician is to wheedle the editorial backing of a newspaper.”
Frederick Nebel, A Free Press
whet “The accepted purpose of coming attractions in movie theatres is to whet the viewers’
desire to see the film.” John Simon, Reverse Angle
whimsical “This is not a whimsical idea—it is a serious plan.” Calvin Klein, New York
Magazine, 9/15/95
wince “He took the cruel blow without a wince or a cry.” A. Conan Doyle, The Last Book of
Sherlock Holmes
wistful “I am sad when I see those wistful ads placed by the lovelorn in the classified
columns.” E. B. White, The Essays of E. B. White
wrest “Their attempt to wrest control of the company was thwarted by the Colonel and his
three supporters on the board.” Edmund Ward, Jr., “Bulls and Bears” [adapted]
yen “She could not resist the yen to see how her classmates had progressed so she agreed to
attend the class reunion.” Woman’s Home Companion, 9/94
zealous “James I was zealous in prosecuting Scottish sorcerers.” George Lyman Kittredge,
Witchcraft in Old and New England
zenith “At the zenith of her fame as a musical star, she was assassinated by a crazed fan.” H.
Hudson, People, 7/21/9